The Project Gutenberg Etext of Cyropaedia, by Xenophon [Dakyns]
#14 in our series by Xenophon


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


CYROPAEDIA

By Xenophon

Translated by H. G. Dakyns

February, 2000  [Etext #2085]


The Project Gutenberg Etext of Cyropaedia, by Xenophon [Dakyns]
*****This file should be named cyrus10.txt or cyrus10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, cyrus11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, cyrus10a.txt


Etext prepared by John Bickers, jbickers@templar.actrix.gen.nz
and Dagny, dagnyj@hotmail.com


Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.

We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

******

To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
author and by title, and includes information about how
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
for a more complete list of our various sites.

To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
at http://promo.net/pg).

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

Example FTP session:

ftp sunsite.unc.edu
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]

***

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





Etext prepared by John Bickers, jbickers@templar.actrix.gen.nz
and Dagny, dagnyj@hotmail.com





CYROPAEDIA
THE EDUCATION OF CYRUS

by XENOPHON




Translated By
Henry Graham Dakyns

Revised By
F. M. Stawell




DEDICATION

To Clifton College



PREPARER'S NOTE

This was typed from an Everyman's Library edition. It seems that
Dakyns died before Cyropaedia could be included as the planned fourth
and final volume of his series, "The Works of Xenophon," published in
the 1890s by Macmillan and Co. The works in that series can all be
found in Project Gutenberg under their individual titles. The complete
list of Xenophon's works (though there is doubt about some of these)
is:

  Work                                   Number of books

  The Anabasis                                         7
  The Hellenica                                        7
  The Cyropaedia                                       8
  The Memorabilia                                      4
  The Symposium                                        1
  The Economist                                        1
  On Horsemanship                                      1
  The Sportsman                                        1
  The Cavalry General                                  1
  The Apology                                          1
  On Revenues                                          1
  The Hiero                                            1
  The Agesilaus                                        1
  The Polity of the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians   2

Text in brackets "{}" is my transliteration of Greek text into English
using an Oxford English Dictionary alphabet table. The diacritical
marks have been lost.




INTRODUCTION

A very few words may suffice by way of introduction to this
translation of the /Cyropaedia/.

Professor Jowett, whose Plato represents the high-water mark of
classical translation, has given us the following reminders: "An
English translation ought to be idiomatic and interesting, not only to
the scholar, but also to the unlearned reader. It should read as an
original work, and should also be the most faithful transcript which
can be made of the language from which the translation is taken,
consistently with the first requirement of all, that it be English.
The excellence of a translation will consist, not merely in the
faithful rendering of words, or in the composition of a sentence only,
or yet of a single paragraph, but in the colour and style of the whole
work."

These tests may be safely applied to the work of Mr. Dakyns. An
accomplished Greek scholar, for many years a careful and sympathetic
student of Xenophon, and possessing a rare mastery of English idiom,
he was unusually well equipped for the work of a translator. And his
version will, as I venture to think, be found to satisfy those
requirements of an effective translation which Professor Jowett laid
down. It is faithful to the tone and spirit of the original, and it
has the literary quality of a good piece of original English writing.
For these and other reasons it should prove attractive and interesting
reading for the average Englishman.

Xenophon, it must be admitted, is not, like Plato, Thucydides, or
Demosthenes, one of the greatest of Greek writers, but there are
several considerations which should commend him to the general reader.
He is more representative of the type of man whom the ordinary
Englishman specially admires and respects, than any other of the Greek
authors usually read.

An Athenian of good social position, endowed with a gift of eloquence
and of literary style, a pupil of Socrates, a distinguished soldier,
an historian, an essayist, a sportsman, and a lover of the country, he
represents a type of country gentleman greatly honoured in English
life, and this should ensure a favourable reception for one of his
chief works admirably rendered into idiomatic English. And the
substance of the /Cyropaedia/, which is in fact a political romance,
describing the education of the ideal ruler, trained to rule as a
benevolent despot over his admiring and willing subjects, should add a
further element of enjoyment for the reader of this famous book in its
English garb.

J. HEREFORD.




EDITOR'S NOTE

In preparing this work for the press, I came upon some notes made by
Mr. Dakyns on the margin of his Xenophon. These were evidently for his
own private use, and are full of scholarly colloquialisms, impromptu
words humorously invented for the need of the moment, and individual
turns of phrase, such as the references to himself under his initials
in small letters, "hgd." Though plainly not intended for publication,
the notes are so vivid and illuminating as they stand that I have
shrunk from putting them into a more formal dress, believing that
here, as in the best letters, the personal element is bound up with
what is most fresh and living in the comment, most characteristic of
the writer, and most delightful both to those who knew him and to
those who will wish they had. I have, therefore, only altered a word
here and there, and added a note or two of my own (always in square
brackets), where it seemed necessary for the sake of clearness.

F. M. S.




CYROPAEDIA

THE EDUCATION OF CYRUS



BOOK I

[C.1] We have had occasion before now to reflect how often democracies
have been overthrown by the desire for some other type of government,
how often monarchies and oligarchies have been swept away by movements
of the people, how often would-be despots have fallen in their turn,
some at the outset by one stroke, while whose who have maintained
their rule for ever so brief a season are looked upon with wonder as
marvels of sagacity and success.

The same lesson, we had little doubt, was to be learnt from the
family: the household might be great or small--even the master of few
could hardly count on the obedience of his little flock. [2] And so,
one idea leading to another, we came to shape our reflexions thus:
Drovers may certainly be called the rulers of their cattle and horse-
breeders the rulers of their studs--all herdsmen, in short, may
reasonably be considered the governors of the animals they guard. If,
then, we were to believe the evidence of our senses, was it not
obvious that flocks and herds were more ready to obey their keepers
than men their rulers? Watch the cattle wending their way wherever
their herdsmen guide them, see them grazing in the pastures where they
are sent and abstaining from forbidden grounds, the fruit of their own
bodies they yield to their master to use as he thinks best; nor have
we ever seen one flock among them all combining against their
guardian, either to disobey him or to refuse him the absolute control
of their produce. On the contrary, they are more apt to show hostility
against other animals than against the owner who derives advantage
from them. But with man the rule is converse; men unite against none
so readily as against those whom they see attempting to rule over
them. [3] As long, therefore, as we followed these reflexions, we
could not but conclude that man is by nature fitted to govern all
creatures, except his fellow-man. But when we came to realise the
character of Cyrus the Persian, we were led to a change of mind: here
is a man, we said, who won for himself obedience from thousands of his
fellows, from cities and tribes innumerable: we must ask ourselves
whether the government of men is after all an impossible or even a
difficult task, provided one set about it in the right way. Cyrus, we
know, found the readiest obedience in his subjects, though some of
them dwelt at a distance which it would take days and months to
traverse, and among them were men who had never set eyes on him, and
for the matter of that could never hope to do so, and yet they were
willing to obey him. [4] Cyrus did indeed eclipse all other monarchs,
before or since, and I include not only those who have inherited their
power, but those who have won empire by their own exertions. How far
he surpassed them all may be felt if we remember that no Scythian,
although the Scythians are reckoned by their myriads, has ever
succeeded in dominating a foreign nation; indeed the Scythian would be
well content could he but keep his government unbroken over his own
tribe and people. The same is true of the Thracians and the Illyrians,
and indeed of all other nations within our ken; in Europe, at any
rate, their condition is even now one of independence, and of such
separation as would seem to be permanent. Now this was the state in
which Cyrus found the tribes and peoples of Asia when, at the head of
a small Persian force, he started on his career. The Medes and the
Hyrcanians accepted his leadership willingly, but it was through
conquest that he won Syria, Assyria, Arabia, Cappadocia, the two
Phrygias, Lydia, Caria, Phoenicia, and Babylonia. Then he established
his rule over the Bactrians, Indians, and Cilicians, over the Sakians,
Paphlagonians, and Magadidians, over a host of other tribes the very
names of which defy the memory of the chronicler; and last of all he
brought the Hellenes in Asia beneath his sway, and by a descent on the
seaboard Cyprus and Egypt also.

[5] It is obvious that among this congeries of nations few, if any,
could have spoken the same language as himself, or understood one
another, but none the less Cyrus was able so to penetrate that vast
extent of country by the sheer terror of his personality that the
inhabitants were prostrate before him: not one of them dared lift hand
against him. And yet he was able, at the same time, to inspire them
all with so deep a desire to please him and win his favour that all
they asked was to be guided by his judgment and his alone. Thus he
knit to himself a complex of nationalities so vast that it would have
taxed a man's endurance merely to traverse his empire in any one
direction, east or west or south or north, from the palace which was
its centre. For ourselves, considering his title to our admiration
proved, we set ourselves to inquire what his parentage might have been
and his natural parts, and how he was trained and brought up to attain
so high a pitch of excellence in the government of men. And all we
could learn from others about him or felt we might infer for ourselves
we will here endeavour to set forth.

[C.2] The father of Cyrus, so runs the story, was Cambyses, a king of
the Persians, and one of the Perseidae, who look to Perseus as the
founder of their race. His mother, it is agreed, was Mandane, the
daughter of Astyages, king of the Medes. Of Cyrus himself, even now in
the songs and stories of the East the record lives that nature made
him most fair to look upon, and set in his heart the threefold love of
man, of knowledge, and of honour. He would endure all labours, he
would undergo all dangers, for the sake of glory. [2] Blest by nature
with such gifts of soul and body, his memory lives to this day in the
mindful heart of ages. It is true that he was brought up according to
the laws and customs of the Persians, and of these laws it must be
noted that while they aim, as laws elsewhere, at the common weal,
their guiding principle is far other than that which most nations
follow. Most states permit their citizens to bring up their own
children at their own discretion, and allow the grown men to regulate
their own lives at their own will, and then they lay down certain
prohibitions, for example, not to pick and steal, not to break into
another man's house, not to strike a man unjustly, not to commit
adultery, not to disobey the magistrate, and so forth; and on the
transgressor they impose a penalty. [3] But the Persian laws try, as
it were, to steal a march on time, to make their citizens from the
beginning incapable of setting their hearts on any wickedness or
shameful conduct whatsoever. And this is how they set about their
object.

In their cities they have an open place or square dedicated to Freedom
(Free Square they call it), where stand the palace and other public
buildings. From this place all goods for sale are rigidly excluded,
and all hawkers and hucksters with their yells and cries and
vulgarities. They must go elsewhere, so that their clamour may not
mingle with and mar the grace and orderliness of the educated classes.
[4] This square, where the public buildings stand, is divided into
four quarters which are assigned as follows: one for the boys, another
for the youths, a third for the grown men, and the last for those who
are past the age of military service. The law requires all the
citizens to present themselves at certain times and seasons in their
appointed places. The lads and the grown men must be there at
daybreak; the elders may, as a rule, choose their own time, except on
certain fixed days, when they too are expected to present themselves
like the rest. Moreover, the young men are bound to sleep at night
round the public buildings, with their arms at their side; only the
married men among them are exempt, and need not be on duty at night
unless notice has been given, though even in their case frequent
absence is thought unseemly. [5] Over each of these divisions are
placed twelve governors, twelve being the number of the Persian
tribes. The governors of the boys are chosen from the elders, and
those are appointed who are thought best fitted to make the best of
their lads: the governors of the youths are selected from the grown
men, and on the same principle; and for the grown men themselves and
their own governors; the choice falls on those who will, it is hoped,
make them most prompt to carry out their appointed duties, and fulfil
the commands imposed by the supreme authority. Finally, the elders
themselves have presidents of their own, chosen to see that they too
perform their duty to the full.

[6] We will now describe the services demanded from the different
classes, and thus it will appear how the Persians endeavour to improve
their citizens. The boys go to school and give their time to learning
justice and righteousness: they will tell you they come for that
purpose, and the phrase is as natural with them as it is for us to
speak of lads learning their letters. The masters spend the chief part
of the day in deciding cases for their pupils: for in this boy-world,
as in the grown-up world without, occasions of indictment are never
far to seek. There will be charges, we know, of picking and stealing,
of violence, of fraud, of calumny, and so forth. The case is heard and
the offender, if shown to be guilty, is punished. [7] Nor does he
escape who is found to have accused one of his fellows unfairly. And
there is one charge the judges do not hesitate to deal with, a charge
which is the source of much hatred among grown men, but which they
seldom press in the courts, the charge of ingratitude. The culprit
convicted of refusing to repay a debt of kindness when it was fully in
his power meets with severe chastisement. They reason that the
ungrateful man is the most likely to forget his duty to the gods, to
his parents, to his fatherland, and his friends. Shamelessness, they
hold, treads close on the heels of ingratitude, and thus ingratitude
is the ringleader and chief instigator to every kind of baseness. [8]
Further, the boys are instructed in temperance and self-restraint, and
they find the utmost help towards the attainment of this virtue in the
self-respecting behaviour of their elders, shown them day by day. Then
they are taught to obey their rulers, and here again nothing is of
greater value than the studied obedience to authority manifested by
their elders everywhere. Continence in meat and drink is another
branch of instruction, and they have no better aid in this than,
first, the example of their elders, who never withdraw to satisfy
their carnal cravings until those in authority dismiss them, and next,
the rule that the boys must take their food, not with their mother but
with their master, and not till the governor gives the sign. They
bring from home the staple of their meal, dry bread with nasturtium
for a relish, and to slake their thirst they bring a drinking-cup, to
dip in the running stream. In addition, they are taught to shoot with
the bow and to fling the javelin.

The lads follow their studies till the age of sixteen or seventeen,
and then they take their places as young men.

[9] After that they spend their time as follows. For ten years they
are bound to sleep at night round the public buildings, as we said
before, and this for two reasons, to guard the community and to
practise self-restraint; because that season of life, the Persians
conceive, stands most in need of care. During the day they present
themselves before the governors for service to the state, and,
whenever necessary, they remain in a body round the public buildings.
Moreover, when the king goes out to hunt, which he will do several
times a month, he takes half the company with him, and each man must
carry bow and arrows, a sheathed dagger, or "sagaris," slung beside
the quiver, a light shield, and two javelins, one to hurl and the
other to use, if need be, at close quarters. [10] The reason of this
public sanction for the chase is not far to seek; the king leads just
as he does in war, hunting in person at the head of the field, and
making his men follow, because it is felt that the exercise itself is
the best possible training for the needs of war. It accustoms a man to
early rising; it hardens him to endure head and cold; it teaches him
to march and to run at the top of his speed; he must perforce learn to
let fly arrow and javelin the moment the quarry is across his path;
and, above all, the edge of his spirit must needs be sharpened by
encountering any of the mightier beasts: he must deal his stroke when
the creature closes, and stand on guard when it makes its rush:
indeed, it would be hard to find a case in war that has not its
parallel in the chase. [11] But to proceed: the young men set out with
provisions that are ampler, naturally, than the boys' fare, but
otherwise the same. During the chase itself they would not think of
breaking their fast, but if a halt is called, to beat up the game, or
for any hunter's reason, then they will make, as it were, a dinner of
their breakfast, and, hunting again on the morrow till dinner-time,
they will count the two days as one, because they have only eaten one
day's food. This they do in order that, if the like necessity should
arise in war, they may be found equal to it. As relish to their bread
these young men have whatever they may kill in the chase, or failing
that, nasturtium like the boys. And if one should ask how they can
enjoy the meal with nasturtium for their only condiment and water for
their only drink, let him bethink himself how sweet barley bread and
wheaten can taste to the hungry man and water to the thirsty. [12] As
for the young men who are left at home, they spend their time in
shooting and hurling the javelin, and practising all they learnt as
boys, in one long trial of skill. Beside this, public games are open
to them and prizes are offered; and the tribe which can claim the
greatest number of lads distinguished for skill and courage and
faithfulness is given the meed of praise from all the citizens, who
honour, not only their present governor, but the teacher who trained
them when they were boys. Moreover, these young men are also employed
by the magistrates if garrison work needs to be done or if malefactors
are to be tracked or robbers run down, or indeed on any errand which
calls for strength of limb and fleetness of foot. Such is the life of
the youth. But when the ten years are accomplished they are classed as
grown men. [13] And from this time forth for five-and-twenty years
they live as follows.

First they present themselves, as in youth, before the magistrates for
service to the state wherever there is need for strength and sound
sense combined. If an expedition be on foot the men of this grade
march out, not armed with the bow or the light shield any longer, but
equipped with what are called the close-combat arms, a breastplate up
to the throat, a buckler on the left arm (just as the Persian warrior
appears in pictures), and for the right hand a dagger or a sword.
Lastly, it is from this grade that all the magistrates are appointed
except the teachers for the boys. But when the five-and-twenty years
are over and the men have reached the age of fifty years or more, then
they take rank as elders, and the title is deserved. [14] These elders
no longer go on military service beyond the frontier; they stay at
home and decide all cases, public and private both. Even capital
charges are left to their decision, and it is they who choose all the
magistrates. If a youth or a grown man breaks the law he is brought
into court by the governors of his tribe, who act as suitors in the
case, aided by any other citizen who pleases. The cause is heard
before the elders and they pronounce judgment; and the man who is
condemned is disenfranchised for the rest of his days.

[15] And now, to complete the picture of the whole Persian policy, I
will go back a little. With the help of what has been said before, the
account may now be brief; the Persians are said to number something
like one hundred and twenty thousand men: and of these no one is by
law debarred from honour or office. On the contrary, every Persian is
entitled to send his children to the public schools of righteousness
and justice. As a fact, all who can afford to bring up their children
without working do send them there: those who cannot must forego the
privilege. A lad who has passed through a public school has a right to
go and take his place among the youths, but those who have not gone
through the first course may not join them. In the same way the youths
who have fulfilled the duties of their class are entitled eventually
to rank with the men, and to share in office and honour: but they must
first spend their full time among the youths; if not, they go no
further. Finally, those who as grown men have lived without reproach
may take their station at last among the elders. Thus these elders
form a college, every member of which has passed through the full
circle of noble learning; and this is that Persian polity and that
Persian training which, in their belief, can win them the flower of
excellence. [16] And even to this day signs are left bearing witness
to that ancient temperance of theirs and the ancient discipline that
preserved it. To this day it is still considered shameful for a
Persian to spit in public, or wipe the nose, or show signs of wind, or
be seen going apart for his natural needs. And they could not keep to
this standard unless they were accustomed to a temperate diet, and
were trained to exercise and toil, so that the humours of the body
were drawn off in other ways. Hitherto we have spoken of the Persians
as a whole: we will now go back to our starting-point and recount the
deeds of Cyrus from his childhood.

[C.3] Until he was twelve years old or more, Cyrus was brought up in
the manner we have described, and showed himself to be above all his
fellows in his aptitude for learning and in the noble and manly
performance of every duty. But about this time, Astyages sent for his
daughter and her son, desiring greatly to see him because he had heard
how noble and fair he was. So it fell out that Mandane came to
Astyages, bringing her son Cyrus with her. [2] And as soon as they
met, the boy, when he heard that Astyages was his mother's father,
fell on his neck and kissed him without more ado, like the loving lad
nature had made him, as though he had been brought up at his
grandfather's side from the first and the two of them had been
playmates of old. Then he looked closer and saw that the king's eyes
were stencilled and his cheeks painted, and that he wore false curls
after the fashion of the Medes in those days (for these adornments,
and the purple robes, the tunics, the necklaces, and the bracelets,
they are all Median first and last, not Persian; the Persian, as you
find him at home even now-a-days, still keeps to his plainer dress and
his plainer style of living.) The boy, seeing his grandfather's
splendour, kept his eyes fixed on him, and cried, "Oh, mother, how
beautiful my grandfather is!" Then his mother asked him which he
thought the handsomer, his father or his grandfather, and he answered
at once, "My father is the handsomest of all the Persians, but my
grandfather much the handsomest of all the Medes I ever set eyes on,
at home or abroad." [3] At that Astyages drew the child to his heart,
and gave him a beautiful robe and bracelets and necklaces in sign of
honour, and when he rode out, the boy must ride beside him on a horse
with a golden bridle, just like King Astyages himself. And Cyrus, who
had a soul as sensitive to beauty as to honour, was pleased with the
splendid robe, and overjoyed at learning to ride, for a horse is a
rare sight in Persia, a mountainous country, and one little suited to
the breed.

[4] Now Cyrus and his mother sat at meat with the king, and Astyages,
wishing the lad to enjoy the feast and not regret his home, plied him
with dainties of every sort. At that, so says the story, Cyrus burst
out, "Oh, grandfather, what trouble you must give yourself reaching
for all these dishes and tasting all these wonderful foods!" "Ah,
but," said Astyages, "is not this a far better meal than you ever had
in Persia?" Thereupon, as the tale runs, Cyrus answered, "Our way,
grandfather, is much shorter than yours, and much simpler. We are
hungry and wish to be fed, and bread and meat brings us where we want
to be at once, but you Medes, for all your haste, take so many turns
and wind about so much it is a wonder if you ever find your way to the
goal that we have reached long ago." [5] "Well, my lad," said his
grandfather, "we are not at all averse to the length of the road:
taste the dishes for yourself and see how good they are." "One thing I
do see," the boy said, "and that is that you do not quite like them
yourself." And when Astyages asked him how he felt so sure of that,
Cyrus answered, "Because when you touch an honest bit of bread you
never wipe your hands, but if you take one of these fine kickshaws you
turn to your napkin at once, as if you were angry to find your fingers
soiled." [6] "Well and good, my lad, well and good," said the king,
"only feast away yourself and make good cheer, and we shall send you
back to Persia a fine strong fellow." And with the word he had dishes
of meat and game set before his grandson. The boy was taken aback by
their profusion, and exclaimed, "Grandfather, do you give me all this
for myself, to do what I like with it?" "Certainly I do," said the
king. [7] Whereupon, without more ado, the boy Cyrus took first one
dish and then another and gave them to the attendants who stood about
his grandfather, and with each gift he made a little speech: "That is
for you, for so kindly teaching me to ride;" "And that is for you, in
return for the javelin you gave me, I have got it still;" "And this is
for you, because you wait on my grandfather so prettily;" "And this
for you, sir, because you honour my mother." And so on until he had
got rid of all the meat he had been given. [8] "But you do not give a
single piece to Sacas, my butler," quoth the grandfather, "and I
honour him more than all the rest." Now this Sacas, as one may guess,
was a handsome fellow, and he had the right to bring before the king
all who desired audience, to keep them back if he thought the time
unseasonable. But Cyrus, in answer to his grandfather's question
retorted eagerly, like a lad who did not know what fear meant, "And
why should you honour him so much, grandfather?" Then Astyages laughed
and said, "Can you not see how prettily he mixes the cup, and with
what a grace he serves the wine?" And indeed, these royal cup-bearers
are neat-handed at their task, mixing the bowl with infinite elegance,
and pouring the wine into the beakers without spilling a drop, and
when they hand the goblet they poise it deftly between thumb and
finger for the banqueter to take. [9] "Now, grandfather," said the
boy, "tell Sacas to give me the bowl, and let me pour out the wine as
prettily as he if I can, and win your favour." So the king bade the
butler hand him the bowl, and Cyrus took it and mixed the wine just as
he had seen Sacas do, and then, showing the utmost gravity and the
greatest deftness and grace, he brought the goblet to his grandfather
and offered it with such an air that his mother and Astyages, too,
laughed outright, and then Cyrus burst out laughing also, and flung
his arms round his grandfather and kissed him, crying, "Sacas, your
day is done! I shall oust you from your office, you may be sure. I
shall make just as pretty a cup-bearer as you--and not drink the wine
myself!" For it is the fact that the king's butler when he offers the
wine is bound to dip a ladle in the cup first, and pour a little in
the hollow of his hand and sip it, so that if he has mixed poison in
the bowl it will do him no good himself. [10] Accordingly, Astyages,
to carry on the jest, asked the little lad why he had forgotten to
taste the wine though he had imitated Sacas in everything else. And
the boy answered, "Truly, I was afraid there might be poison in the
bowl. For when you gave your birthday feast to your friends I could
see quite plainly that Sacas had put in poison for you all." "And how
did you discover that, my boy?" asked the king. "Because I saw how
your wits reeled and how you staggered; and you all began doing what
you will not let us children do--you talked at the top of your voices,
and none of you understood a single word the others said, and then you
began singing in a way to make us laugh, and though you would not
listen to the singer you swore that it was right nobly sung, and then
each of you boasted of his own strength, and yet as soon as you got up
to dance, so far from keeping time to the measure, you could barely
keep your legs. And you seemed quite to have forgotten, grandfather,
that you were king, and your subjects that you were their sovereign.
Then at last I understood that you must be celebrating that 'free
speech' we hear of; at any rate, you were never silent for an
instant." [11] "Well, but, boy," said Astyages, "does your father
never lose his head when he drinks?" "Certainly not," said the boy.
"What happens then?" asked the king. "He quenches his thirst,"
answered Cyrus, "and that is all. No harm follows. You see, he has no
Sacas to mix his wine for him." "But, Cyrus," put in his mother, "why
are you so unkind to Sacas?" "Because I do so hate him," answered the
boy. "Time after time when I have wanted to go to my grandfather this
old villain has stopped me. Do please, grandfather, let me manage him
for three days." "And how would you set about it?" Astyages asked.
"Why," said the boy, "I will plant myself in the doorway just as he
does, and then when he wants to go in to breakfast I will say 'You
cannot have breakfast yet: HE is busy with some people,' and when he
comes for dinner I will say 'No dinner yet: HE is in his bath,' and as
he grows ravenous I will say 'Wait a little: HE is with the ladies of
the court,' until I have plagued and tormented him as he torments me,
keeping me away from you, grandfather, when I want to come." [12] Thus
the boy delighted his elders in the evening, and by day if he saw that
his grandfather or his uncle wanted anything, no one could forestall
him in getting it; indeed nothing seemed to give him greater pleasure
than to please them.

[13] Now when Mandane began to think of going back to her husband,
Astyages begged her to leave the boy behind. She answered that though
she wished to please her father in everything, it would be hard to
leave the boy against his will. [14] Then the old man turned to Cyrus:
"My boy, if you will stay with us, Sacas shall never stop you from
coming to me: you shall be free to come whenever you choose, and the
oftener you come the better it will please me. You shall have horses
to ride, my own and as many others as you like, and when you leave us
you shall take them with you. And at dinner you shall go your own away
and follow your own path to your own goal of temperance just as you
think right. And I will make you a present of all the game in my parks
and paradises, and collect more for you, and as soon as you have
learnt to ride you shall hunt and shoot and hurl the javelin exactly
like a man. And you shall have boys to play with and anything else you
wish for: you have only to ask me and it shall be yours." [15] Then
his mother questioned the boy and asked him whether he would rather
stay with his grandfather in Media, or go back home with her: and he
said at once that he would rather stay. And when she went on to ask
him the reason, he answered, so the story says, "Because at home I am
thought to be the best of the lads at shooting and hurling the
javelin, and so I think I am: but here I know I am the worst at
riding, and that you may be sure, mother, annoys me exceedingly. Now
if you leave me here and I learn to ride, when I am back in Persia you
shall see, I promise you, that I will outdo all our gallant fellows on
foot, and when I come to Media again I will try and show my
grandfather that, for all his splendid cavalry, he will not have a
stouter horseman than his grandson to fight his battles for him." [16]
Then said his mother, "But justice and righteousness, my son, how can
you learn them here when your teachers are at home?" "Oh," said Cyrus,
"I know all about them already." "How do you know that you do?" asked
Mandane. "Because," answered the boy, "before I left home my master
thought I had learnt enough to decide the cases, and he set me to try
the suits. Yes! and I remember once, said he, "I got a whipping for
misjudgment. [17] I will tell you about that case. There were two
boys, a big boy and a little boy, and the big boy's coat was small and
the small boy's coat was huge. So the big boy stripped the little boy
and gave him his own small coat, while he put on the big one himself.
Now in giving judgment I decided that it was better for both parties
that each should have the coat that fitted him best. But I never got
any further in my sentence, because the master thrashed me here, and
said that the verdict would have been excellent if I had been
appointed to say what fitted and what did not, but I had been called
in to decide to whom the coat belonged, and the point to consider was,
who had a right to it: Was he who took a thing by violence to keep it,
or he who had had it made and bought it for his own? And the master
taught me that what is lawful is just and what is in the teeth of law
is based on violence, and therefore, he said, the judge must always
see that his verdict tallies with the law. So you see, mother, I have
the whole of justice at my fingers' ends already. And if there should
be anything more I need to know, why, I have my grandfather beside me,
and he will always give me lessons." [18] "But," rejoined his mother,
"what everyone takes to be just and righteous at your grandfather's
court is not thought to be so in Persia. For instance, your own
grandfather has made himself master over all and sundry among the
Medes, but with the Persians equality is held to be an essential part
of justice: and first and foremost, your father himself must perform
his appointed services to the state and receive his appointed dues:
and the measure of these is not his own caprice but the law. Have a
care then, or you may be scourged to death when you come home to
Persia, if you learn in your grandfather's school to love not kingship
but tyranny, and hold the tyrant's belief that he and he alone should
have more than all the rest." "Ah, but, mother," said the boy, "my
grandfather is better at teaching people to have less than their
share, not more. Cannot you see," he cried, "how he has taught all the
Medes to have less than himself? So set your mind at rest, mother, my
grandfather will never make me, or any one else, an adept in the art
of getting too much."

[C.4] So the boy's tongue ran on. But at last his mother went home,
and Cyrus stayed behind and was brought up in Media. He soon made
friends with his companions and found his way to their hearts, and
soon won their parents by the charm of his address and the true
affection he bore their sons, so much so that when they wanted a
favour from the king they bade their children ask Cyrus to arrange the
matter for them. And whatever it might be, the kindliness of the lad's
heart and the eagerness of his ambition made him set the greatest
store on getting it done. [2] On his side, Astyages could not bring
himself to refuse his grandson's lightest wish. For once, when he was
sick, nothing would induce the boy to leave his side; he could not
keep back his tears, and his terror at the thought that his
grandfather might die was plain for every one to see. If the old man
needed anything during the night Cyrus was the first to notice it, it
was he who sprang up first to wait upon him, and bring him what he
thought would please him. Thus the old king's heart was his.

[3] During these early days, it must be allowed, the boy was something
too much of a talker, in part, may be, because of his bringing-up. He
had been trained by his master, whenever he sat in judgment, to give a
reason for what he did, and to look for the like reason from others.
And moreover, his curiosity and thirst for knowledge were such that he
must needs inquire from every one he met the explanation of this,
that, and the other; and his own wits were so lively that he was ever
ready with an answer himself for any question put to him, so that
talkativeness had become, as it were, his second nature. But, just as
in the body when a boy is overgrown, some touch of youthfulness is
sure to show itself and tell the secret of his age, so for all the
lad's loquacity, the impression left on the listener was not of
arrogance, but of simplicity and warm-heartedness, and one would
gladly have heard his chatter to the end rather than have sat beside
him and found him dumb.

[4] However, as he grew in stature and the years led him to the time
when childhood passes into youth he became more chary of his words and
quieter in his tone: at times, indeed, he was so shy that he would
blush in the presence of his elders, and there was little sign left of
the old forwardness, the impulsiveness of the puppy who will jump up
on every one, master and stranger alike. Thus he grew more sedate, but
his company was still most fascinating, and little wonder: for
whenever it came to a trial of skill between himself and his comrades
he would never challenge his mates to those feats in which he himself
excelled: he would start precisely one where he felt his own
inferiority, averring that he would outdo them all,--indeed, he would
spring to horse in order to shoot or hurl the javelin before he had
got a firm seat--and then, when he was worsted, he would be the first
to laugh at his own discomfiture. [5] He had no desire to escape
defeat by giving up the effort, but took glory in the resolution to do
better another time, and thus he soon found himself as good a horseman
as his peers, and presently, such was his ardour, he surpassed them
all, and at last the thinning of the game in the king's preserves
began to show what he could do. What with the chasing and the shooting
and the spearing, the stock of animals ran so low that Astyages was
hard put to it to collect enough for him. Then Cyrus, seeing that his
grandfather for all his goodwill could never furnish him with enough,
came to him one day and said, "Grandfather, why should you take so
much trouble in finding game for me? If only you would let me go out
to hunt with my uncle, I could fancy every beast we came across had
been reared for my particular delight!" [6] But however anxious the
lad might be to go out to the chase, he had somehow lost the old
childish art of winning what he wanted by coaxing: and he hesitated a
long time before approaching the king again. If in the old days he had
quarrelled with Sacas for not letting him in, now he began to play the
part of Sacas against himself, and could not summon courage to intrude
until he thought the right moment had come: indeed, he implored the
real Sacas to let him know when he might venture. So that the old
butler's heart was won, and he, like the rest of the world, was
completely in love with the young prince.

[7] At last when Astyages saw that the lad's heart was really set on
hunting in the open country, he gave him leave to go out with his
uncle, taking care at the same time to send an escort of mounted
veterans at his heels, whose business it was to keep watch and ward
over him in any dangerous place or against any savage beast. Cyrus
plied his retinue with questions about the creatures they came across,
which must he avoid and which might he hunt? They told him he must be
on his guard against bears and wild-boars and lions and leopards: many
a man had found himself at too close quarters with these dangerous
creatures, and been torn to pieces: but antelopes, they said, and deer
and mountain sheep and wild asses were harmless enough. And the
huntsman, they added, ought to be as careful about dangerous places as
about the beasts themselves: many a time horse and rider had gone
headlong down a precipice to death. [8] The lad seemed to take all
their lessons to heart at the time: but then he saw a stag leap up,
and forgot all the wise cautions he had heard, giving chase forthwith,
noticing nothing except the beast ahead of him. His horse, in its
furious plunge forward, slipped, and came down on its knees, all but
throwing the rider over its head. As luck would have it the boy
managed to keep his seat, and the horse recovered its footing. When
they reached the flat bottom, Cyrus let fly his javelin, and the stag
fell dead, a beautiful big creature. The lad was still radiant with
delight when up rode the guard and took him severely to task. Could he
not see the danger he had run? They would certainly tell his
grandfather, that they would. Cyrus, who had dismounted, stood quite
still and listened ruefully, hanging his head while they rated him.
But in the middle of it all he heard the view-halloo again: he sprang
to his horse as though frenzied--a wild-boar was charging down on
them, and he charged to meet it, and drawing his bow with the surest
aim possible, struck the beast in the forehead, and laid him low. [9]
But now his uncle thought it was high time to scold his nephew
himself; the lad's boldness was too much. Only, the more he scolded
the more Cyrus begged he would let him take back the spoil as a
present for his grandfather. To which appeal, says the story, his
uncle made reply: "But if your grandfather finds out that you have
gone in chase yourself, he will not only scold you for going but me
for letting you go." "Well, let him whip me if he likes," said the
boy, "when once I have given him my beasts: and you too, uncle," he
went on, "punish me however you choose, only do not refuse me this."
So Cyaxares was forced to yield:--"Have it your own way then, you are
little less than our king already." [10] Thus it was that Cyrus was
allowed to bring his trophies home, and in due course presented them
to his grandfather. "See, grandfather, here are some animals I have
shot for you." But he did not show his weapons in triumph: he only
laid them down with the gore still on them where he hoped his
grandfather would see them. It is easy to guess the answer Astyages
gave:--"I must needs accept with pleasure every gift you bring me,
only I want none of them at the risk of your own life." And Cyrus
said, "If you really do not want them yourself, grandfather, will you
give them to me? And I will divide them among the lads." "With all my
heart," said the old man, "take them, or anything else you like;
bestow them where you will, and welcome." [11] So Cyrus carried off
the spoil, and divided it with his comrades, saying all the while,
"What foolery it was, when we used to hunt in the park! It was no
better than hunting creatures tied by a string. First of all, it was
such a little bit of a place, and then what scarecrows the poor beasts
were, one halt, and another maimed! But those real animals on the
mountains and the plains--what splendid beasts, so gigantic, so sleek
and glossy! Why, the stags leapt up against the sky as though they had
wings, and the wild-boars came rushing to close quarters like warriors
in battle! And thanks to their breadth and bulk one could not help
hitting them. Why, even as they lie dead there," cried he, "they look
finer than those poor walled-up creatures when alive! But you," he
added, "could not your fathers let you go out to hunt too?" "Gladly
enough," answered they, "if only the king gave the order." [12]
"Well," said Cyrus, "who will speak to Astyages for us?" "Why,"
answered they, "who so fit to persuade him as yourself?" "No, by all
that's holy, not I!" cried Cyrus. "I cannot think what has come over
me: I cannot speak to my grandfather any more; I cannot look him
straight in the face. If this fit grows on me, I am afraid I shall
become no better than an idiot. And yet, when I was a little boy, they
tell me, I was sharp enough at talking." To which the other lads
retorted, "Well, it is a bad business altogether: and if you cannot
bestir yourself for your friends, if you can do nothing for us in our
need, we must turn elsewhere." [13] When Cyrus heard that he was stung
to the quick: he went away in silence and urged himself to put on a
bold face, and so went in to his grandfather, not, however, without
planning first how he could best bring in the matter. Accordingly he
began thus: "Tell me, grandfather," said he, "if one of your slaves
were to run away, and you caught him, what would you do to him?" "What
else should I do," the old man answered, "but clap irons on him and
set him to work in chains?" "But if he came back of his own accord,
how would you treat him then?" "Why, I would give him a whipping, as a
warning not to do it again, and then treat him as though nothing had
happened." "It is high time then," said the boy, "that you began
getting a birch ready for your grandson: for I am planning to take my
comrades and run away on a hunting expedition." "Very kind of you to
tell me, beforehand," said Astyages. "And now listen, I forbid you to
set foot outside the palace grounds. A pretty thing," he added, "if
for the sake of a day's hunting I should let my daughter's lamb get
lost." [14] So Cyrus did as he was ordered and stayed at home, but he
spent his days in silence and his brow was clouded. At last Astyages
saw how bitterly the lad felt it, and he made up his mind to please
him by leading out a hunting-party himself. He held a great muster of
horse and foot, and the other lads were not forgotten: he had the
beasts driven down into the flat country where the horses could be
taken easily, and then the hunt began in splendid style. After the
royal fashion--for he was present in person himself--he gave orders
that no one was to shoot until Cyrus had hunted to his heart's
content. But Cyrus would not hear of any such hindrance to the others:
"Grandfather," he cried, "if you wish me to enjoy myself, let my
friends hunt with me and each of us try our best." [15] Thereupon
Astyages let them all go, while he stood still and watched the sight,
and saw how they raced to attack the quarry and how their ambition
burned within them as they followed up the chase and let fly their
javelins. But above all he was overjoyed to see how his grandson could
not keep silence for sheer delight, calling upon his fellows by name
whenever he came up with the quarry, like a noble young hound, baying
from pure excitement. It gladdened the old man's heart to hear how
gleefully the boy would laugh at one of his comrades and how eagerly
he would applaud another without the slightest touch of jealousy. At
length it was time to turn, and home they went, laden with their
mighty trophies. And ever afterwards, so well pleased was the king
with the day's hunting, that whenever it was possible, out he must go
with his grandson, all his train behind him, and he never failed to
take the boys also, "to please Cyrus." Thus did Cyrus spend his early
life, sharing in and helping towards the happiness of all, and
bringing no sorrow to any man.

[16] But when he was about fifteen years of age, it chanced that the
young Prince of Assyria, who was about to marry a wife, planned a
hunting-party of his own, in honour of the bridal. And, having heard
that on the frontiers of Assyria and Media there was much game to be
got, untouched and unmolested because of the war, the prince chose
these marches for his hunting-ground. But for safety sake he took with
him a large escort of cavalry and targeteers, who were to drive the
beasts down from their lairs into the cultivated levels below where it
was easy to ride. He set out to the place where the Assyrian outposts
were planted and a garrison on duty, and there he and his men prepared
to take their supper, intending to begin the hunt with the morrow's
dawn. [17] And as evening had fallen, it happened that the night-
watch, a considerable body of horse and foot, arrived from the city to
relieve the garrison on guard. Thus the prince found that he had
something like a large army at his call: the two garrisons as well as
the troop of horse and foot for the hunt. And then he asked himself
whether it would not be the best of plans to drive off booty from the
country of the Medes? In this way more lustre would be given to the
chase, and there would be great store of beasts for sacrifice. With
this intent he rose betimes and led his army out: the foot soldiers he
massed together on the frontier, while he himself, at the head of his
cavalry, rode up to the border fortresses of the Medes. Here he halted
with the strongest and largest part of his company, to prevent the
garrisons from sallying out, and meanwhile he sent picked men forward
by detachments with orders to raid the country in every direction,
waylay everything they chanced upon, and drive the spoil back to him.

[18] While this was going on news was brought to Astyages that the
enemy was across the border, and he hastened to the rescue at once,
himself at the head of his own body-guard, and his son with such
troopers as were ready to hand, leaving word for others to follow with
all despatch. But when they were in sight of the Assyrians, and saw
their serried ranks, horse and foot, drawn up in order, compact and
motionless, they came to a halt themselves. [19] Now Cyrus, seeing
that all the rest of the world was off to the rescue, boot and saddle,
must needs ride out too, and so put on his armour for the first time,
and could scarcely believe it was true, he had longed so often and so
ardently to wear it all. And right beautiful it was, and right well it
fitted the lad, the armour that his grandsire had had made for him. So
he put on the whole accoutrement, mounted his charger, and galloped to
the front. And Astyages, though he wondered who had sent the boy, bade
him stay beside him, now that he had come. Cyrus, as he looked at the
horsemen facing them, turned to his grandfather with the question,
"Can those men yonder be our enemies, grandfather, those who are
standing so quietly beside their horses?" "Enemies they are too for
all that," said the king. "And are those enemies too?" the boy asked,
"those who are riding over there?" "Yes, to be sure." "Well,
grandfather, a sorry set they look, and sorry jades they ride to
ravage our lands! It would be well for some of us to charge them!"
"Not yet, my boy," answered his grandfather, "look at the mass of
horsemen there. If we were to charge the others now, these friends of
theirs would charge us, for our full strength is not yet on the
field." "Yes, but," suggested the boy, "if you stay here yourself,
ready to receive our supporters, those fellows will be afraid to stir
either, and the cattle-lifters will drop their booty quick enough, as
soon as they find they are attacked."

[20] Astyages felt there was much in what the boy said, and thinking
all the while what wonderful sense he showed and how wide-awake he
was, gave orders for his son to take a squadron of horse and charge
the raiders. "If the main body move to attack," he added, "I will
charge myself and give them enough to do here." Accordingly Cyaxares
took a detachment of horse and galloped to the field. Cyrus seeing the
charge, darted forward himself, and swept to the van, leading it with
Cyaxares close at his heels and the rest close behind them. As soon as
the plunderers saw them, they left their booty and took to flight.
[21] The troopers, with Cyrus at their head, dashed in to cut them
off, and some they overtook at once and hewed down then and there;
others slipped past, and then they followed in hot pursuit, and caught
some of them too. And Cyrus was ever in the front, like a young hound,
untrained as yet but bred from a gallant stock, charging a wild-boar
recklessly; forward he swept, without eyes or thought for anything but
the quarry to be captured and the blow to be struck. But when the
Assyrian army saw their friends in trouble they pushed forward, rank
on rank, saying to themselves the pursuit would stop when their own
movement was seen. [22] But Cyrus never slackened his pace a whit: in
a transport of joy he called on his uncle by name as he pressed
forward, hanging hot-foot on the fugitives, while Cyaxares still clung
to his heels, thinking maybe what his father Astyages would say if he
hung back, and the others still followed close behind them, even the
faint-hearted changed into heroes for the nonce.

Now Astyages, watching their furious onslaught, and seeing the enemy
move steadily forward in close array to meet them, decided to advance
without a moment's delay himself, for fear that his son and Cyrus
might come to harm, crashing in disorder against the solid battalions
of the foe. [23] The Assyrians saw the movement of the king and came
to a halt, spears levelled and bows bent, expecting that, when their
assailants came within range, they would halt likewise as they had
usually done before. For hitherto, whenever the armies met, they would
only charge up to a certain distance, and there take flying shots, and
so keep up the skirmish until evening fell. But now the Assyrians saw
their own men borne down on them in rout, with Cyrus and his comrades
at their heels in full career, while Astyages and his cavalry were
already within bowshot. It was more than they could face, and they
turned and fled. After them swept the Medes in full pursuit, and those
they caught they mowed down, horse and man, and those that fell they
slew. There was no pause until they came up with the Assyrian foot.
[24] Here at last they drew rein in fear of some hidden ambuscade, and
Astyages led his army off. The exploit of his cavalry pleased him
beyond measure, but he did not know what he could say to Cyrus. It was
he to whom the engagement was due, and the victory; but the boy's
daring was on the verge of madness. Even during the return home his
behaviour was strange; he could not forbear riding round alone to look
into the faces of the slain, and those whose duty it was could hardly
drag him away to lead him to Astyages: indeed, the youth was glad
enough to keep them as a screen between himself and the king, for he
saw that the countenance of his grandfather grew stern at the sight of
him.

[25] So matters passed in Media: and more and more the name of Cyrus
was on the lip of every man, in song and story everywhere, and
Astyages, who had always loved him, was astonished beyond all measure
at the lad. Meanwhile his father, Cambyses, rejoiced to hear such
tidings of his son; but, when he heard that he was already acting like
a man of years, he thought it full time to call him home again that he
might complete his training in the discipline of his fatherland. The
story tells how Cyrus answered the summons, saying he would rather
return home at once so that his father might not be vexed or his
country blame him. And Astyages, too, thought it his plain duty to
send the boy back, but he must needs give him horses to take with him,
as many as he would care to choose, and other gifts beside, not only
for the love he bore him but for the high hopes he had that the boy
would one day prove a man of mark, a blessing to his friends, and a
terror to his foes. And when the time came for Cyrus to go, the whole
world poured out to speed him on his journey--little children and lads
of his own age, and grown men and greybeards on their steeds, and
Astyages the king. And, so says the chronicle, the eyes of none were
dry when they turned home again. [26] Cyrus himself, they tell us,
rode away in tears. He heaped gifts on all his comrades, sharing with
them what Astyages had given to himself; and at last he took off the
splendid Median cloak he wore and gave it to one of them, to tell him,
plainer than words could say, how his heart clung to him above the
rest. And his friends, they say, took the gifts he gave them, but they
brought them all back to Astyages, who sent them to Cyrus again. But
once more Cyrus sent them back to Media with this prayer to his
grandfather:--"If you would have me hold my head up when I come back
to you again, let my friends keep the gifts I gave them." And Astyages
did as the boy asked.

[27] And here, if a tale of boyish love is not out of place, we might
tell how, when Cyrus was just about to depart and the last good-byes
were being said, each of his kinsmen in the Persian fashion--and to
this day the custom holds in Persia--kissed him on the lips as they
bade him god-speed. Now there was a certain Mede, as beautiful and
brave a man as ever lived, who had been enamoured of Cyrus for many a
long day, and, when he saw the kiss, he stayed behind, and after the
others had withdrawn he went up to Cyrus and said, "Me, and me alone,
of all your kindred, Cyrus, you refuse to recognize?" And Cyrus
answered, "What, are you my kinsman too?" "Yes, assuredly," the other
answered, and the lad rejoined, "Ah, then, that is why you looked at
me so earnestly; and I have seen you look at me like that, I think,
more than once before." "Yes," answered the Mede, "I have often longed
to approach you, but as often, heaven knows, my heart failed me." "But
why should that be," said Cyrus, "seeing you are my kinsman?" And with
the word, he leant forward and kissed him on the lips. [28] Then the
Mede, emboldened by the kiss, took heart and said, "So in Persia it is
really the custom for relatives to kiss?" "Truly yes," answered Cyrus,
"when we see each other after a long absence, or when we part for a
journey." "Then the time has come," said the other, "to give me a
second kiss, for I must leave you now." With that Cyrus kissed him
again and so they parted. But the travellers were not far on their way
when suddenly the Mede came galloping after them, his charger covered
with foam. Cyrus caught sight of him:--"You have forgotten something?
There is something else you wanted to say?" "No," said the Mede, "it
is only such a long, long while since we met." "Such a little, little
while you mean, my kinsman," answered Cyrus. "A little while!"
repeated the other. "How can you say that? Cannot you understand that
the time it takes to wink is a whole eternity if it severs me from the
beauty of your face?"

Then Cyrus burst out laughing in spite of his own tears, and bade the
unfortunate man take heart of grace and be gone. "I shall soon be back
with you again, and then you can stare at me to your heart's content,
and never wink at all."

[C.5] Thus Cyrus left his grandfather's court and came home to Persia,
and there, so it is said, he spent one year more as a boy among boys.
At first the lads were disposed to laugh at him, thinking he must have
learnt luxurious ways in Media, but when they saw that he could take
the simple Persian food as happily as themselves, and how, whenever
they made good cheer at a festival, far from asking for any more
himself he was ready to give his own share of the dainties away, when
they saw and felt in this and in other things his inborn nobleness and
superiority to themselves, then the tide turned and once more they
were at his feet.

And when this part of his training was over, and the time was come for
him to join the younger men, it was the same tale once more. Once more
he outdid all his fellows, alike in the fulfilment of his duty, in the
endurance of hardship, in the reverence he showed to age, and the
obedience he paid to authority.

[2] Now in the fullness of time Astyages died in Media, and Cyaxares
his son, the brother of Cyrus' mother, took the kingdom in his stead.
By this time the king of Assyria had subdued all the tribes of Syria,
subjugated the king of Arabia, brought the Hyrcanians under his rule,
and was holding the Bactrians in siege. Therefore he came to think
that, if he could but weaken the power of the Medes, it would be easy
for him to extend his empire over all the nations round him, since the
Medes were, without doubt, the strongest of them all. [3] Accordingly
he sent his messengers to every part of his dominions: to Croesus,
king of Lydia, to the king of Cappadocia, to both the Phrygias, to the
Paphlagonians and the Indians, to the Carians and the Cilicians. And
he bade them spread slanders abroad against the Persians and the
Medes, and say moreover that these were great and mighty kingdoms
which had come together and made alliance by marriage with one
another, and unless a man should be beforehand with them and bring
down their power it could not be but that they would fall on each of
their neighbours in turn and subdue them one by one. So the nations
listened to the messengers and made alliance with the king of Assyria:
some were persuaded by what he said and others were won over by gifts
and gold, for the riches of the Assyrian were great. [4] Now Cyaxares,
the son of Astyages, was aware of these plots and preparations, and he
made ready on his side, so far as in him lay, sending word to the
Persian state and to Cambyses the king, who had his sister to wife.
And he sent to Cyrus also, begging him to come with all speed at the
head of any force that might be furnished, if so be the Council of
Persia would give him men-at-arms. For by this time Cyrus had
accomplished his ten years among the youths and was now enrolled with
the grown men. [5] He was right willing to go, and the Council of
Elders appointed him to command the force for Media. They bade him
choose two hundred men among the Peers, each of them to choose four
others from their fellows. Thus was formed a body of a thousand Peers:
and each of the thousand had orders to raise thirty men from the
commons--ten targeteers, ten slingers, and ten archers--and thus three
regiments were levied, 10,000 archers, 10,000 slingers, and 10,000
targeteers, over and above the thousand Peers. The whole force was to
be put under the command of Cyrus. [6] As soon as he was appointed,
his first act had been to offer sacrifice, and when the omens were
favourable he had chosen his two hundred Peers, and each of them had
chosen their four comrades. Then he called the whole body together,
and for the first time spoke to them as follows:--

[7] "My friends, I have chosen you for this work, but this is not the
first time that I have formed my opinion of your worth: from my
boyhood I have watched your zeal for all that our country holds to be
honourable and your abhorrence for all that she counts base. And I
wish to tell you plainly why I accepted this office myself and why I
ask your help. [8] I have long felt sure that our forefathers were in
their time as good men as we. For their lives were one long effort
towards the self-same deeds of valour as are held in honour now; and
still, for all their worth, I fail to see what good they gained either
for the state or for themselves. [9] Yet I cannot bring myself to
believe that there is a single virtue practised among mankind merely
in order that the brave and good should fare no better than the base
ones of the earth. Men do not forego the pleasures of the moment to
say good-bye to all joy for evermore--no, this self-control is a
training, so that we may reap the fruits of a larger joy in the time
to come. A man will toil day and night to make himself an orator, yet
oratory is not the one aim of his existence: his hope is to influence
men by his eloquence and thus achieve some noble end. So too with us,
and those like us, who are drilled in the arts of war: we do not give
our labours in order to fight for ever, endlessly and hopelessly, we
hope that we too one day, when we have proved our mettle, may win and
wear for ourselves and for our city the threefold ornament of wealth,
of happiness, of honour. [10] And if there should be some who have
worked hard all their lives and suddenly old-age, they find, has
stolen on them unawares, and taken away their powers before they have
gathered in the fruit of all their toil, such men seem to me like
those who desire to be thrifty husbandmen, and who sow well and plant
wisely, but when the time of harvest comes let the fruit drop back
ungarnered into the soil whence it sprang. Or as if an athlete should
train himself and reach the heights where victory may be won and at
the last forbear to enter the lists--such an one, I take it, would but
meet his deserts if all men cried out upon him for a fool. [11] Let
not such be our fate, my friends. Our own hearts bear us witness that
we, too, from our boyhood up, have been trained in the school of
beauty and nobleness and honour, and now let us go forward to meet our
foes. They, I know right well, when matched with us, will prove but
novices in war. He is no true warrior, though he be skilled with the
javelin and the bow and ride on horseback with the best, who, when the
call for endurance comes, is found to fail: toil finds him but a
novice. Nor are they warriors who, when they should wake and watch,
give way to slumber: sleep finds them novices. Even endurance will not
avail, if a man has not learnt to deal as a man should by friends and
foes: such an one is unschooled in the highest part of his calling.
[12] But with you it is not so: to you the night will be as the day;
toil, your school has taught you, is the guide to happiness; hunger
has been your daily condiment, and water you take to quench your
thirst as the lion laps the stream. And you have that within your
hearts which is the rarest of all treasures and the most akin to war:
of all sweet sounds the sweetest sound for you is the voice of fame.
You are fair Honour's suitors, and you must needs win your title to
her favour. Therefore you undergo toil and danger gladly.

[13] "Now if I said all this of you, and my heart were not in my
words, I should but cheat myself. For in so far as you should fail to
fulfil my hopes of you, it is on me that the shame would fall. But I
have faith in you, bred of experience: I trust in your goodwill
towards me, and in our enemy's lack of wit; you will not belie my
hopes. Let us go forth with a light heart; we have no ill-fame to
fear: none can say we covet another man's goods unlawfully. Our enemy
strikes the first blow in an unrighteous cause, and our friends call
us to protect them. What is more lawful than self-defence? What is
nobler than to succour those we love? [14] And you have another ground
of confidence--in opening this campaign I have not been forgetful of
the gods: you have gone in and out with me, and you know how in all
things, great and small, I strive to win their blessing. And now," he
added, "what need of further words? I will leave you now to choose
your own men, and when all is ready you will march into Media at their
head. Meanwhile I will return to my father and start before you, so
that I may learn what I can about the enemy as soon as may be, and
thus make all needful preparations, so that by God's help we may win
glory on the field."

[C.6] Such were his orders and they set about them at once. But Cyrus
himself went home and prayed to the gods of his father's house, to
Hestia and Zeus, and to all who had watched over his race. And when he
had done so, he set out for the war, and his father went with him on
the road. They were no sooner clear of the city, so says the story,
than they met with favourable omens of thunder and lightning, and
after that they went forward without further divination, for they felt
that no man could mistake the signs from the Ruler of the gods. [2]
And as they went on their way Cyrus' father said to him, "My son, the
gods are gracious to us, and look with favour on your journey--they
have shown it in the sacrifices, and by their signs from heaven. You
do not need another man to tell you so, for I was careful to have you
taught this art, so that you might understand the counsels of the gods
yourself and have no need of an interpreter, seeing with your own eyes
and hearing with your own ears and taking the heavenly meaning for
yourself. Thus you need not be at the mercy of any soothsayers who
might have a mind to deceive you, speaking contrary to the omens
vouchsafed from heaven, nor yet, should you chance to be without a
seer, drift in perplexity and know not how to profit by the heavenly
signs: you yourself through your own learning can understand the
warnings of the gods and follow them."

[3] "Yes, father," answered Cyrus, "so far as in me lies, I bear your
words in mind, and pray to the gods continually that they may show us
favour and vouchsafe to counsel us. I remember," he went on, "how once
I heard you say that, as with men, so with the gods, it was but
natural if the prayer of him should prevail who did not turn to
flatter them only in time of need, but was mindful of them above all
in the heyday of his happiness. It was thus indeed, you said, that we
ought to deal with our earthly friends." [4] "True, my son," said his
father, "and because of all my teaching, you can now approach the gods
in prayer with a lighter heart and a more confident hope that they
will grant you what you ask, because your conscience bears you witness
that you have never forgotten them." "Even so," said Cyrus, "and in
truth I feel towards them as though they were my friends." [5] "And do
you remember," asked his father, "certain other conclusions on which
we were agreed? How we felt there were certain things that the gods
had permitted us to attain through learning and study and training?
The accomplishment of these is the reward of effort, not of idleness;
in these it is only when we have done all that it is our duty to do
that we are justified in asking for blessings from the gods." [6] "I
remember very well," said Cyrus, "that you used to talk to me in that
way: and indeed I could not but agree with the arguments you gave. You
used to say that a man had no right to pray he might win a cavalry
charge if he had never learnt how to ride, or triumph over master-
bowmen if he could not draw a bow, or bring a ship safe home to
harbour if he did not know how to steer, or be rewarded with a
plenteous harvest if he had not so much as sown grain into the ground,
or come home safe from battle if he took no precautions whatsoever.
All such prayers as these, you said, were contrary to the very
ordinances of heaven, and those who asked for things forbidden could
not be surprised if they failed to win them from the gods. Even as a
petition in the face of law on earth would have no success with men."

[7] "And do you remember," said his father, "how we thought that it
would be a noble work enough if a man could train himself really and
truly to be beautiful and brave and earn all he needed for his
household and himself? That, we said, was a work of which a man might
well be proud; but if he went further still, if he had the skill and
the science to be the guide and governor of other men, supplying all
their wants and making them all they ought to be, that, it seemed to
us, would be indeed a marvel." [8] "Yes, my father," answered Cyrus,
"I remember it very well. I agreed with you that to rule well and
nobly was the greatest of all works, and I am of the same mind still,"
he went on, "whenever I think of government in itself. But when I look
on the world at large, when I see of what poor stuff those men are
made who contrive to uphold their rule and what sort of antagonists we
are likely to find in them, then I can only feel how disgraceful it
would be to cringe before them and not to face them myself and try
conclusions with them on the field. All of them, I perceive," he
added, "beginning with our own friends here, hold to it that the ruler
should only differ from his subjects by the splendour of his banquets,
the wealth of gold in his coffers, the length and depth of his
slumbers, and his freedom from trouble and pain. But my views are
different: I hold that the ruler should be marked out from other men,
not by taking life easily, but by his forethought and his wisdom and
his eagerness for work." [9] "True, my son," the father answered, "but
you know the struggle must in part be waged not against flesh and
blood but against circumstances, and these may not be overcome so
easily. You know, I take it, that if supplies were not forthcoming,
farewell to this government of yours." "Yes," Cyrus answered, "and
that is why Cyaxares is undertaking to provide for all of us who join
him, whatever our numbers are." "So," said the father, "and you really
mean, my son, that you are relying only on these supplies of Cyaxares
for this campaign of yours?" "Yes," answered Cyrus. "And do you know
what they amount to?" "No," he said, "I cannot say that I do." "And
yet," his father went on, "you are prepared to rely on what you do not
know? Do you forget that the needs of the morrow must be high, not to
speak of the outlay for the day?" "Oh, no," said Cyrus, "I am well
aware of that." "Well," said the father, "suppose the cost is more
than Cyaxares can bear, or suppose he actually meant to deceive you,
how would your soldiers fare?" "Ill enough, no doubt," answered he.
"And now tell me, father, while we are still in friendly country, if
you know of any resources that I could make my own?" [10] "You want to
know where you could find resources of your own?" repeated his father.
"And who is to find that out, if not he who holds the keys of power?
We have given you a force of infantry that you would not exchange, I
feel sure, for one that was more than twice its size; and you will
have the cavalry of Media to support you, the finest in the world. I
conceive there are none of the nations round about who will not be
ready to serve you, whether to win your favour or because they fear
disaster. These are matters you must look into carefully, in concert
with Cyaxares, so that nothing should ever fail you of what you need,
and, if only for habit's sake, you should devise some means for
supplying your revenue. Bear this maxim in mind before all others--
never put off the collecting of supplies until the day of need, make
the season of your abundance provide against the time of dearth. You
will gain better terms from those on whom you must depend if you are
not thought to be in straits, and, what is more, you will be free from
blame in the eyes of your soldiers. That in itself will make you more
respected; wherever you desire to help or to hurt, your troops will
follow you with greater readiness, so long as they have all they need,
and your words, you may be sure, will carry the greater weight the
fuller your display of power for weal or woe."

[11] "Yes, father," Cyrus said, "I feel all you say is true, and the
more because as things now stand none of my soldiers will thank me for
the pay that is promised them. They are well aware of the terms
Cyaxares has offered for their help: but whatever they get over and
above the covenanted amount they will look upon as a free gift, and
for that they will, in all likelihood, feel most gratitude to the
giver." "True," said the father, "and really for a man to have a force
with which he could serve his friends and take vengeance on his foes,
and yet neglect the supplies for it, would be as disgraceful, would it
not? as for a farmer to hold lands and labourers and yet allow fields
to lie barren for lack of tillage."

"No such neglect," answered the son, "shall ever be laid at my door.
Through friendly lands or hostile, trust me, in this business of
supplying my troops with all they need I will always play my part."

[12] "Well, my son," the father resumed, "and do you remember certain
other points which we agreed must never be overlooked?" "Could I
forget them?" answered Cyrus. "I remember how I came to you for money
to pay the teacher who professed to have taught me generalship, and
you gave it me, but you asked me many questions. 'Now, my boy,' you
said, 'did this teacher you want to pay ever mention economy among the
things a general ought to understand? Soldiers, no less than servants
in a house, are dependent on supplies.' And I was forced to tell the
truth and admit that not a syllable had been mentioned on that score.
Then you asked me if anything had been taught about health and
strength, since a true general is bound to think of these matters no
less than of tactics and strategy. And when I was forced to say no,
you asked me if he had taught me any of the arts which give the best
aid in war. Once again I had to say no and then you asked whether he
had ever taught me how to kindle enthusiasm in my men. For in every
undertaking, you said, there was all the difference in the world
between energy and lack of spirit. I shook my head and your
examination went on:--Had this teacher laid no stress on the need for
obedience in an army, or on the best means of securing discipline?
[14] And finally, when it was plain that even this had been utterly
ignored, you exclaimed, 'What in the world, then, does your professor
claim to have taught you under the name of generalship?' To that I
could at last give a positive answer: 'He taught me tactics.' And then
you gave a little laugh and ran through your list point by point:--
'And pray what will be the use of tactics to an army without supplies,
without health, without discipline, without knowledge of those arts
and inventions that are of use in war?' And so you made it clear to me
that tactics and manuvres and drill were only a small part of all
that is implied in generalship, and when I asked you if you could
teach me the rest of it you bade me betake myself to those who stood
high in repute as great generals, and talk with them and learn from
their lips how each thing should be done. [15] So I consorted with all
I thought to be of authority in these matters. As regards our present
supplies I was persuaded that what Cyaxares intended to provide was
sufficient, and, as for the health of the troops, I was aware that the
cities where health was valued appointed medical officers, and the
generals who cared for their soldiers took out a medical staff; and so
when I found myself in this office I gave my mind to the matter at
once: and I flatter myself, father," he added, "that I shall have with
me an excellent staff of surgeons and physicians." [16] To which the
father made reply, "Well, my son, but these excellent men are, after
all, much the same as the tailors who patch torn garments. When folk
are ill, your doctors can patch them up, but your own care for their
health ought to go far deeper than that: your prime object should be
to save your men from falling ill at all." "And pray, father," asked
Cyrus, "how can I succeed in that?" "Well," answered Cambyses, "I
presume if you are to stay long in one place you will do your best to
discover a healthy spot for your camp, and if you give your mind to
the matter you can hardly fail to find it. Men, we know, are forever
discussing what places are healthy and what are not, and their own
complexions and the state of their own bodies is the clearest
evidence. But you will not content yourself with choosing a site, you
will remember the care you take yourself for your own health." [17]
"Well," said Cyrus, "my first rule is to avoid over-feeding as most
oppressive to the system, and my next to work off all that enters the
body: that seems the best way to keep health and gain strength." "My
son," Cambyses answered, "these are the principles you must apply to
others." "What!" said Cyrus; "do you think it will be possible for the
soldiers to diet and train themselves?" "Not only possible," said the
father, "but essential. For surely an army, if it is to fulfil its
function at all, must always be engaged in hurting the foe or helping
itself. A single man is hard enough to support in idleness, a
household is harder still, an army hardest of all. There are more
mouths to be filled, less wealth to start with, and greater waste; and
therefore an army should never be unemployed." [18] "If I take your
meaning," answered Cyrus, "you think an idle general as useless as an
idle farmer. And here and now I answer for the working general, and
promise on his behalf that with God's help he will show you that his
troops have all they need and their bodies are all they ought to be.
And I think," he added, "I know a way by which an officer might do
much towards training his men in the various branches of war. Let him
propose competitions of every kind and offer prizes; the standard of
skill will rise, and he will soon have a body of troops ready to his
hand for any service he requires." "Nothing could be better," answered
the father. "Do this, and you may be sure you will watch your
regiments at their manuvres with as much delight as if they were a
chorus in the dance."

[19] "And then," continued Cyrus, "to rouse enthusiasm in the men,
there can be nothing, I take it, like the power of kindling hope?"
"True," answered his father, "but that alone would be as though a
huntsman were for ever rousing his pack with the view-halloo. At
first, of course, the hounds will answer eagerly enough, but after
they have been cheated once or twice they will end by refusing the
call even when the quarry is really in sight. And so it is with hope.
Let a man rouse false expectations often enough, and in the end, even
when hope is at the door, he may cry the good news in vain. Rather
ought he to refrain from speaking positively himself when he cannot
know precisely; his agents may step in and do it in his place; but he
should reserve his own appeal for the supreme crises of supreme
danger, and not dissipate his credit."

"By heaven, a most admirable suggestion!" cried Cyrus, "and one much
more to my mind! [20] As for enforcing obedience, I hope I have had
some training in that already; you began my education yourself when I
was a child by teaching me to obey you, and then you handed me over to
masters who did as you had done, and afterwards, when we were lads, my
fellows and myself, there was nothing on which the governors laid more
stress. Our laws themselves, I think, enforce this double lesson:--
'Rule thou and be thou ruled.' And when I come to study the secret of
it all, I seem to see that the real incentive to obedience lies in the
praise and honour that it wins against the discredit and the
chastisement which fall on the disobedient." [21] "That, my son," said
the father, "is the road to the obedience of compulsion. But there is
a shorter way to a nobler goal, the obedience of the will. When the
interests of mankind are at stake, they will obey with joy the man
whom they believe to be wiser than themselves. You may prove this on
all sides: you may see how the sick man will beg the doctor to tell
him what he ought to do, how a whole ship's company will listen to the
pilot, how travellers will cling to the one who knows the way better,
as they believe, than they do themselves. But if men think that
obedience will lead them to disaster, then nothing, neither penalties,
nor persuasion, nor gifts, will avail to rouse them. For no man
accepts a bribe to his own destruction." [22] "You would have me
understand," said Cyrus, "that the best way to secure obedience is to
be thought wiser than those we rule?" "Yes," said Cambyses, "that is
my belief."

"And what is the quickest way," asked Cyrus, "to win that reputation?"

"None quicker, my lad, than this: wherever you wish to seem wise, be
wise. Examine as many cases as you like, and you will find that what I
say is true. If you wished to be thought a good farmer, a good
horseman, a good physician, a good flute-player, or anything else
whatever, without really being so, just imagine what a world of
devices you would need to invent, merely to keep up the outward show!
And suppose you did get a following to praise you and cry you up,
suppose you did burden yourself with all kinds of paraphernalia for
your profession, what would come of it all? You succeed at first in a
very pretty piece of deception, and then by and by the test comes, and
the impostor stands revealed."

[23] "But," said Cyrus, "how can a man really and truly attain to the
wisdom that will serve his turn?"

"Well, my son, it is plain that where learning is the road to wisdom,
learn you must, as you learnt your battalion-drill, but when it comes
to matters which are not to be learnt by mortal men, nor foreseen by
mortal minds, there you can only become wiser than others by
communicating with the gods through the art of divination. But,
always, wherever you know that a thing ought to be done, see that it
is done, and done with care; for care, not carelessness, is the mark
of the wise man."

[24] "And now," said Cyrus, "to win the affection of those we rule--
and there is nothing, I take it, of greater importance--surely the
path to follow lies open to all who desire the love of their friends.
We must, I mean, show that we do them good." "Yes, my child, but to do
good really at all seasons to those we wish to help is not always
possible: only one way is ever open, and that is the way of sympathy;
to rejoice with the happy in the day of good things, to share their
sorrow when ill befalls them, to lend a hand in all their
difficulties, to fear disaster for them, and guard against it by
foresight--these, rather than actual benefits, are the true signs of
comradeship. [25] And so in war; if the campaign is in summer the
general must show himself greedy for his share of the sun and the
heat, and in winter for the cold and the frost, and in all labours for
toil and fatigue. This will help to make him beloved of his
followers." "You mean, father," said Cyrus, "that a commander should
always be stouter-hearted in everything than those whom he commands."
"Yes, my son, that is my meaning," said he; "only be well assured of
this: the princely leader and the private soldier may be alike in
body, but their sufferings are not the same: the pains of the leader
are always lightened by the glory that is his and by the very
consciousness that all his acts are done in the public eye."

[26] "But now, father, suppose the time has come, and you are
satisfied that your troops are well supplied, sound in wind and limb,
well able to endure fatigue, skilled in the arts of war, covetous of
honour, eager to show their mettle, anxious to follow, would you not
think it well to try the chance of battle without delay?" "By all
means," said the father, "if you are likely to gain by the move: but
if not, for my own part, the more I felt persuaded of my own
superiority and the power of my troops, the more I should be inclined
to stand on my guard, just as we put our greatest treasures in the
safest place we have." [27] "But how can a man make sure that he will
gain?" "Ah, there you come," said the father, "to a most weighty
matter. This is no easy task, I can tell you. If your general is to
succeed he must prove himself an arch-plotter, a king of craft, full
of deceits and stratagems, a cheat, a thief, and a robber, defrauding
and overreaching his opponent at every turn."

"Heavens!" said Cyrus, and burst out laughing, "is this the kind of
man you want your son to be!" "I want him to be," said the father, "as
just and upright and law-abiding as any man who ever lived." [28] "But
how comes it," said his son, "that the lessons you taught us in
boyhood and youth were exactly opposed to what you teach me now?"
"Ah," said the father, "those lessons were for friends and fellow-
citizens, and for them they still hold good, but for your enemies--do
you not remember that you were also taught to do much harm?"

"No, father," he answered, "I should say certainly not."

"Then why were you taught to shoot? Or to hurl the javelin? Or to trap
wild-boars? Or to snare stags with cords and caltrops? And why did you
never meet the lion or the bear or the leopard in fair fight on equal
terms, but were always trying to steal some advantage over them? Can
you deny that all that was craft and deceit and fraud and greed?"

[29] "Why, of course," answered the young man, "in dealing with
animals, but with human beings it was different; if I was ever
suspected of a wish to cheat another, I was punished, I know, with
many stripes."

"True," said the father, "and for the matter of that we did not permit
you to draw bow or hurl javelin against human beings; we taught you
merely to aim at a mark. But why did we teach you that? Not so that
you might injure your friends, either then or now, but that in war you
might have the skill to make the bodies of living men your targets. So
also we taught you the arts of deceit and craft and greed and
covetousness, not among men it is true, but among beasts; we did not
mean you ever to turn these accomplishments against your friends, but
in war we wished you to be something better than raw recruits."

[30] "But, father," Cyrus answered, "if to do men good and to do men
harm were both of them things we ought to learn, surely it would have
been better to teach them in actual practice?"

[31] Then the father said, "My son, we are told that in the days of
our forefathers there was such a teacher once. This man did actually
teach his boys righteousness in the way you suggest, to lie and not to
lie, to cheat and not to cheat, to calumniate and not to calumniate,
to be grasping and not grasping. He drew the distinction between our
duty to friends and our duty to enemies; and he went further still; he
taught men that it was just and right to deceive even a friend for his
own good, or steal his property. [32] And with this he must needs
teach his pupils to practise on one another what he taught them, just
as the people of Hellas, we are told, teach lads in the wrestling-
school to fence and to feint, and train them by their practice with
one another. Now some of his scholars showed such excellent aptitudes
for deception and overreaching, and perhaps no lack of taste for
common money-making, that they did not even spare their friends, but
used their arts on them. [33] And so an unwritten law was framed by
which we still abide, bidding us teach our children as we teach our
servants, simply and solely not to lie, and not to cheat, and not to
covert, and if they did otherwise to punish them, hoping to make them
humane and law-abiding citizens. [34] But when they came to manhood,
as you have come, then, it seemed, the risk was over, and it would be
time to teach them what is lawful against our enemies. For at your age
we do not believe you will break out into savagery against your
fellows with whom you have been knit together since childhood in ties
of friendship and respect. In the same way we do not talk to the young
about the mysteries of love, for if lightness were added to desire,
their passion might sweep them beyond all bounds."

[35] "Then in heaven's name, father," said Cyrus, "remember that your
son is but a backward scholar and a late learner in this lore of
selfishness, and teach me all you can that may help me to overreach
the foe."

"Well," said the father, "you must plot and you must plan, whatever
the size of his force and your own, to catch his men in disorder when
yours are all arrayed, unarmed when yours are armed, asleep when yours
are awake, or you must wait till he is visible to you and you
invisible to him, or till he is labouring over heavy ground and you
are in your fortress and can give him welcome there."

[36] "But how," asked Cyrus, "can I catch him in all these blunders?"

"Simply because both you and he are bound to be often in some such
case; both of you must take your meals sometime; both of you must
sleep; your men must scatter in the morning to satisfy the needs of
nature, and, for better for worse, whatever the roads are like, you
will be forced to make use of them. All these necessities you must lay
to heart, and wherever you are weaker, there you must be most on your
guard, and wherever your foe is most assailable, there you must press
the attack."

[37] Then Cyrus asked, "And are these the only cases where one can
apply the great principle of greed, or are there others?"

"Oh, yes, there are many more; indeed in these simple cases any
general will be sure to keep good watch, knowing how necessary it is.
But your true cheat and prince of swindlers is he who can lure the
enemy on and throw him off his guard, suffer himself to be pursued and
get the pursuers into disorder, lead the foe into difficult ground and
then attack him there. [38] Indeed, as an ardent student, you must not
confine yourself to the lessons you have learnt; you must show
yourself a creator and discoverer, you must invent stratagems against
the foe; just as a real musician is not content with the mere elements
of his art, but sets himself to compose new themes. And if in music it
is the novel melody, the flower-like freshness, that wins popularity,
still more in military matters it is the newest contrivance that
stands the highest, for the simple reason that such will give you the
best chance of outwitting your opponent. [39] And yet, my son, I must
say that if you did no more than apply against human beings the
devices you learnt to use against the smallest game, you would have
made considerable progress in this art of overreaching. Do you not
think so yourself? Why, to snare birds you would get up by night in
the depth of winter and tramp off in the cold; your nets were laid
before the creatures were astir, and your tracks completely covered
and you actually had birds of your own, trained to serve you and decoy
their kith and kin, while you yourself lay in some hiding-place,
seeing yet unseen, and you had learnt by long practice to jerk in the
net before the birds could fly away. [40] Or you might be out after
hares, and for a hare you had two breeds of dogs, one to track her out
by scent, because she feeds in the dusk and takes to her form by day,
and another to cut off her escape and run her down, because she is so
swift. And even if she escaped these, she did not escape you; you had
all her runs by heart and knew all her hiding-places, and there you
would spread your nets, so that they were scarcely to be seen, and the
very haste of her flight would fling her into the snare. And to make
sure of her you had men placed on the spot to keep a look-out, and
pounce on her at once. And there were you at her heels, shouting and
scaring her out of her wits, so that she was caught from sheer terror,
and there lay your men, as you had taught them, silent and motionless
in their ambuscade. [41] I say, therefore, that if you chose to act
like this against human beings, you would soon have no enemies left to
fight, or I am much mistaken. And even if, as well may be, the
necessity should arise for you to do battle on equal terms in open
field, even so, my son, there will still be power in those arts which
you have studied so long and which teach you to out-villain villainy.
And among them I include all that has served to train the bodies and
fire the courage of your men, all that has made them adepts in every
craft of war. One thing you must ever bear in mind: if you wish your
men to follow you, remember that they expect you to plan for them.
[42] Hence you must never know a careless mood; if it be night, you
must consider what your troops shall do when it is day; if day, how
the night had best be spent. [43] For the rest, you do not need me to
tell you now how you should draw up your troops or conduct your march
by day or night, along broad roads or narrow lanes, over hills or
level ground, or how you should encamp and post your pickets, or
advance into battle or retreat before the foe, or march past a hostile
city, or attack a fortress or retire from it, or cross a river or pass
through a defile, or guard against a charge of cavalry or an attack
from lancers or archers, or what you should do if the enemy comes into
sight when you are marching in column and how you are to take up
position against him, or how deploy into action if you are in line and
he takes you in flank or rear, and how you are to learn all you can
about his movements, while keeping your own as secret as may be; these
are matters on which you need no further word of mine; all that I know
about them you have heard a hundred times, and I am sure you have not
neglected any other authority on whom you thought you could rely. You
know all their theories, and you must apply them now, I take it,
according to circumstances and your need. [44] But," he added, "there
is one lesson that I would fain impress on you, and it is the greatest
of them all. Observe the sacrifices and pay heed to the omens; when
they are against you, never risk your army or yourself, for you must
remember that men undertake enterprises on the strength of probability
alone and without any real knowledge as to what will bring them
happiness. [45] You may learn this from all life and all history. How
often have cities allowed themselves to be persuaded into war, and
that by advisers who were thought the wisest of men, and then been
utterly destroyed by those whom they attacked! How often have
statesmen helped to raise a city or a leader to power, and then
suffered the worst at the hands of those whom they exalted! And many
who could have treated others as friends and equals, giving and
receiving kindnesses, have chosen to use them as slaves, and then paid
the penalty at their hands; and many, not content to enjoy their own
share of good, have been swept on by the craving to master all, and
thereby lost everything that they once possessed; and many have won
the very wealth they prayed for and through it have found destruction.
[46] So little does human wisdom know how to choose the best, helpless
as a man who could but draw lots to see what he should do. But the
gods, my son, who live for ever, they know all things, the things that
have been and the things that are and the things that are to be, and
all that shall come from these; and to us mortals who ask their
counsel and whom they love they will show signs, to tell us what we
should do and what we should leave undone. Nor must we think it
strange if the gods will not vouchsafe their wisdom to all men
equally; no compulsion is laid on them to care for men, unless it be
their will."


NOTES

[This work concludes the translation of Xenophon undertaken by Mr.
Dakyns. ("The Works of Xenophon," with maps, introductions, and notes,
Vols. I.-III., Macmillan.) From references in the earlier vols. (e.g.
Vol. I. pp. lvii., lxx., xc., cxiii., cxxxi.; Vol. III. Part I. pp.
v.-vii.) it is plain the translator considered that the historical
romance of the /Cyropaedia/ was written in Xenophon's old age
(completed /circa/ 365 B.C.) embodying many of his own experiences and
his maturest thoughts on education, on government, on the type of man,
--a rare type, alone fitted for leadership. The figure of his hero,
Cyrus the Great, the founder of the Persian empire, known to him by
story and legend, is modelled on the Spartan king Agesilaus, whom he
loved and admired, and under whom he served in Persia and in Greece
(op. cit. Vol. II., see under /Agesilaus/, Index, and /Hellenica/,
Bks. III.-V. /Agesilaus/, /an Encomium/, passim). Certain traits are
also taken from the younger Cyrus, whom Xenophon followed in his
famous march against his brother, the Persian king, up from the coast
of Asia Minor into the heart of Babylonia (see the /Anabasis/, Bk. I.,
especially c. ix.; op. cit. Vol. I. p. 109). Clearly, moreover, many
of the customs and institutions described in the work as Persian are
really Dorian, and were still in vogue among Xenophon's Spartan
friends (vide e.g. /Hellenica/, Bk. IV., i. S28; op. cit. Vol. II. p.
44).]

C2.4. Qy. Were these tribal customs of the Persians, as doubtless of
the Dorians, or is it all a Dorian idealisation?

C2.13. Good specimen of the "annotative" style with a parenthetic
comment. The passage in brackets might be a gloss, but is it?

C3.3. When did Xenophon himself first learn to ride? Surely this is a
boyish reminiscence, full of sympathy with boy-nature.

C3.12. Beautiful description of a child subject to his parents,
growing in stature and favour with God and man.

C4.2. Perhaps his own grandson, Xenophon the son of Grylus, is the
prototype, and Xenophon himself a sort of ancient Victor Hugo in this
matter of fondness for children.

C4.3. Contrast Autolycus in the /Symposium/, who had, however, reached
the more silent age [e.g. /Symp/., c. iii., fin. tr. Works, Vol. III.
Part I. p. 309].

C4.4. The touch about the puppy an instance of Xenophon's {katharotes}
[clear simplicity of style].

C4.8. Reads like a biographical incident in some hunt of Xenophon, boy
or father.

C4.9-10. The rapidity, one topic introducing and taken up by another,
wave upon wave, {anerithmon lelasma} ["the multitudinous laughter of
the sea"].

C4.12. The truth of this due to sympathy (cf. Archidamus and his
father Agesilaus, /Hell/., V. c. iv.; tr. Works, Vol. II. p. 126).

C4.22. Cyaxares recalls John Gilpin.

C4.24. An Hellenic trait; madness of battle-rage, {menis}. Something
of the fierceness of the /Iliad/ here.

C5.7. Cyrus. His first speech as a general; a fine one; a spirit of
athleticism breathes through it. Cf. /Memorabilia/ for a similar
rationalisation of virtuous self-restraint (e.g. /Mem/., Bk. I. c. 5,
6; Bk. III. c. 8). Paleyan somewhat, perhaps Socratic, not devoid of
common sense. What is the end and aim of our training? Not only for an
earthly aim, but for a high spiritual reward, all this toil.

C5.10. This is Dakyns.

C5.11. "Up, Guards, and at 'em!"

C6. This chapter might have been a separate work appended to the
/Memorabilia/ on Polemics or Archics ["Science of War" and "Science of
Rule"].

C6.3-6. Sounds like some Socratic counsel; the righteous man's
conception of prayer and the part he must himself play.

C6.7. Personal virtue and domestic economy a sufficiently hard task,
let alone that still graver task, the art of grinding masses of men
into virtue.

C6.8, fin. The false theory of ruling in vogue in Media: the /plus/ of
ease instead of the /plus/ of foresight and danger-loving endurance.
Cf. Walt Whitman.

C6.30. Is like the logical remark of a disputant in a Socratic
dialogue of the Alcibiades type, and  31-33 a Socratic /mythos/ to
escape from the dilemma; the breakdown of this ideal /plus/ and
/minus/ righteousness due to the hardness of men's hearts and their
feeble intellects.

C6.31. Who is this ancient teacher or who is his prototype if he is an
ideal being? A sort of Socrates-Lycurgus? Or is Xenophon thinking of
the Spartan Crypteia?

C6.34. For /pleonexia/ and deceit in war, vide /Hipparch/., c. 5 [tr.
Works, Vol. III. Part II. p. 20]. Interesting and Hellenic, I think,
the mere raising of this sort of question; it might be done nowadays,
perhaps, with advantage /or/ disadvantage, less cant and more plain
brutality.

C6.39. Hunting devices applied: throws light on the date of the
/Cyropaedia/, after the Scilluntine days, probably. [After Xenophon
was exiled from Athens, his Spartan friends gave him a house and farm
at Scillus, a township in the Peloponnese, not far from Olympia. See
/Sketch of Xenophon's Life/, Works, Vol. I., p. cxxvi.]

C6.41, init. Colloquial exaggerated turn of phrase; almost "you could
wipe them off the earth."



BOOK II

[C.1] Thus they talked together, and thus they journeyed on until they
reached the frontier, and there a good omen met them: an eagle swept
into view on the right, and went before them as though to lead the
way, and they prayed the gods and heroes of the land to show them
favour and grant them safe entry, and then they crossed the boundary.
And when they were across, they prayed once more that the gods of
Media might receive them graciously, and when they had done this they
embraced each other, as father and son will, and Cambyses turned back
to his own city, but Cyrus went forward again, to his uncle Cyaxares
in the land of Media. [2] And when his journey was done and he was
face to face with him and they had greeted each other as kinsmen may,
then Cyaxares asked the prince how great an armament he had brought
with him? And Cyrus answered, "I have 30,000 with me, men who have
served with you before as mercenaries; and more are coming on behind,
fresh troops, from the Peers of Persia."

"How many of those?" asked Cyaxares. [3] And Cyrus answered, "Their
numbers will not please you, but remember these Peers of ours, though
they are few, find it easy to rule the rest of the Persians, who are
many. But now," he added, "have you any need of us at all? Perhaps it
was only a false alarm that troubled you, and the enemy are not
advancing?"

"Indeed they are," said the other, "and in full force."

[4] "How do you know?" asked Cyrus.

"Because," said he, "many deserters come to us, and all of them, in
one fashion or another, tell the same tale."

"Then we must give battle?" said Cyrus.

"Needs must," Cyaxares replied.

"Well," answered Cyrus, "but you have not told me yet how great their
power is, or our own either. I want to hear, if you can tell me, so
that we may make our plans."

"Listen, then," said Cyaxares. [5] "Croesus the Lydian is coming, we
hear, with 10,000 horse and more than 40,000 archers and targeteers.
Artamas the governor of Greater Phrygia is bringing, they say, 8000
horse, and lancers and targeteers also, 40,000 strong. Then there is
Aribaius the king of Cappadocia with 6000 horse and 30,000 archers and
targeteers. And Aragdus the Arabian with 10,000 horse, a hundred
chariots, and innumerable slingers. As for the Hellenes who dwell in
Asia, it is not clear as yet whether they will send a following or
not. But the Phrygians from the Hellespont, we are told, are mustering
in the Caystrian plain under Gabaidus, 6000 horse and 40,000
targeteers. Word has been sent to the Carians, Cilicians, and
Paphlagonians, but it is said they will not rise; the Lord of Assyria
and Babylon will himself, I believe, bring not less than 20,000 horse,
and I make no doubt as many as 200 chariots, and thousands upon
thousands of men on foot; such at least has been his custom whenever
he invaded us before."

[6] Cyrus answered: "Then you reckon the numbers of the enemy to be,
in all, something like 60,000 horse and 200,000 archers and
targeteers. And what do you take your own to be?"

"Well," he answered, "we ourselves can furnish over 10,000 horse and
perhaps, considering the state of the country, as many as 60,000
archers and targeteers. And from our neighbours, the Armenians," he
added, "we look to get 4000 horse and 20,000 foot."

"I see," said Cyrus, "you reckon our cavalry at less than a third of
the enemy's, and our infantry at less than half."

[7] "Ah," said Cyaxares, "and perhaps you feel that the force you are
bringing from Persia is very small?"

"We will consider that later on," answered Cyrus, "and see then if we
require more men or not. Tell me first the methods of fighting that
the different troops adopt."

"They are much the same for all," answered Cyaxares, "that is to say,
their men and ours alike are armed with bows and javelins."

"Well," replied Cyrus, "if such arms are used, skirmishing at long
range must be the order of the day." "True," said the other. [8] "And
in that case," went on Cyrus, "the victory is in the hands of the
larger force; for even if the same numbers fall on either side, the
few would be exhausted long before the many." "If that be so," cried
Cyaxares, "there is nothing left for us but to send to Persia, and
make them see that if disaster falls on Media it will fall on Persia
next, and beg them for a larger force." "Ah, but," said Cyrus, "you
must remember that even if every single Persian were to come at once,
we could not outnumber our enemies." [9] "But," said the other, "can
you see anything else to be done?" "For my part," answered Cyrus, "if
I could have my way, I would arm every Persian who is coming here in
precisely the same fashion as our Peers at home, that is to say, with
a corslet for the breast, a shield for the left arm, and a sword or
battle-axe for the right hand. If you will give us these you will make
it quite safe for us to close with the enemy, and our foes will find
that flight is far pleasanter than defence. But we Persians," he
added, "will deal with those who do stand firm, leaving the fugitives
to you and to your cavalry, who must give them no time to rally and no
time to escape."

[10] That was the counsel of Cyrus, and Cyaxares approved it. He
thought no more of sending for a larger force, but set about preparing
the equipment he had been asked for, and all was in readiness just
about the time when the Peers arrived from Persia at the head of their
own troops. [11] Then, so says the story, Cyrus called the Peers
together and spoke to them as follows: "Men of Persia, my friends and
comrades, when I looked at you first and saw the arms you bore and how
you were all on fire to meet the enemy, hand to hand, and when I
remembered that your squires are only equipped for fighting on the
outskirts of the field, I confess my mind misgave me. Few and forlorn
they will be, I said to myself, swallowed up in a host of enemies; no
good can come of it. But to-day you are here, and your men behind you,
stalwart and stout of limb, and to-morrow they shall have armour like
our own. None could find fault with their thews and sinews, and as for
their spirit, it is for us to see it does not fail. A leader must not
only have a stout heart himself; he must see to it that his followers
are as valiant as he."

[12] Thus Cyrus spoke, and the Peers were well satisfied at his words,
feeling that on the day of battle they would have more to help them in
the struggle. [13] And one of them said, "Perhaps it will seem strange
if I ask Cyrus to speak in our stead to our fellow-combatants when
they receive their arms, and yet I know well that the words of him who
has the greatest power for weal or woe sink deepest into the
listener's heart. His very gifts, though they should be less than the
gifts of equals, are valued more. These new comrades of ours," he went
on, "would rather be addressed by Cyrus himself than by us, and now
that they are to take their place among the Peers their title will
seem to them far more secure if it is given them by the king's own son
and our general-in-chief. Not that we have not still our own duties
left. We are bound to do our best in every way to rouse the spirit of
our men. Shall we not gain ourselves by all they gain in valour?"

[14] So it came about that Cyrus had the new armour placed before him
and summoned a general meeting of the Persian soldiery, and spoke to
them as follows:

[15] "Men of Persia, born and bred in the same land as ourselves,
whose limbs are as stout and as strong as our own, your hearts should
be as brave. I know they are; and yet at home in the land of our
fathers you did not share our rights; not that we drove you out
ourselves, but you were banished by the compulsion that lay upon you
to find your livelihood for yourselves. Now from this day forward,
with heaven's help, it shall be my care to provide it for you; and
now, if so you will, you have it in your power to take the armour that
we wear ourselves, face the same perils and win the same honours, if
so be you make any glorious deed your own. [16] In former days you
were trained, like ourselves, in the use of bow and javelin, and if
you were at all inferior to us in skill, that was not to be wondered
at; you had not the same leisure for practice as we; but now in this
new accoutrement we shall have no pre-eminence at all. Each of us will
wear a corslet fitted to his breast and carry a shield on his left arm
of the type to which we are all accustomed, and in his right hand a
sabre or a battle-axe. With these we shall smite the enemy before us,
and need have no fear that we shall miss the mark. [17] How can we
differ from one another with these arms? There can be no difference
except in daring. And daring you may foster in your hearts as much as
we in ours. What greater right have we than you to love victory and
follow after her, victory who wins for us and preserves to us all
things that are beautiful and good? Why should you, any more than we,
be found lacking in that power which takes the goods of weaklings and
bestows them on the strong?"

[18] He ended: "Now you have heard all. There lie your weapons; let
him who chooses take them up and write his name with the brigadier in
the same roll as ours. And if a man prefers to remain a mercenary, let
him do so; he carries the arms of a servant."

[19] Thus spoke Cyrus; and the Persians, every man of them, felt they
would be ashamed for the rest of their days, and deservedly, if they
drew back now, when they were offered equal honour in return for equal
toil. One and all they inscribed their names and took up the new arms.

[20] And now in the interval, before the enemy were actually at hand,
but while rumour said they were advancing, Cyrus took on himself a
three-fold task: to bring the physical strength of his men to the
highest pitch, to teach them tactics, and to rouse their spirit for
martial deeds. [21] He asked Cyaxares for a body of assistants whose
duty it should be to provide each of his soldiers with all they could
possibly need, thus leaving the men themselves free for the art of
war. He had learnt, he thought, that success, in whatever sphere, was
only to be won by refusing to attempt a multitude of tasks and
concentrating the mind on one.

Thus in the military training itself he gave up the practice with bow
and javelin, leaving his men to perfect themselves in the use of
sabre, shield, and corslet, accustoming them from the very first to
the thought that they must close with the enemy, or confess themselves
worthless as fellow-combatants; a harsh conclusion for those who knew
that they were only protected in order to fight on behalf of their
protectors. [22] And further, being convinced that wherever the
feeling of emulation can be roused, there the eagerness to excel is
greatest, he instituted competitions for everything in which he
thought his soldiers should be trained. The private soldier was
challenged to prove himself prompt to obey, anxious to work, eager for
danger, and yet ever mindful of discipline, an expert in the science
of war, an artist in the conduct of his arms, and a lover of honour in
all things. The petty officer commanding a squad of five was not only
to equal the leading private, he must also do what he could to bring
his men to the same perfection; the captain of ten must do the same
for his ten, and the company's captain for the company, while the
commander of the whole regiment, himself above reproach, must take the
utmost care with the officers under him so that they in their turn
should see that their subordinates were perfect in all their duties.
[23] For prizes, Cyrus announced that the brigadier in command of the
finest regiment should be raised to the rank of general, the captain
of the finest company should be made a brigadier, the captain of the
finest squad of ten captain of a company, and the captain of the best
five a captain of ten, while the best soldiers from the ranks should
become captains of five themselves. Every one of these officers had
the privilege of being served by those beneath him, and various other
honours also, suited to their several grades, while ampler hopes were
offered for any nobler exploits. [24] Finally prizes were announced to
be won by a regiment or a company or a squad taken as a whole, by
those who proved themselves most loyal to their leaders and most
zealous in the practice of their duty. These prizes, of course, were
such as to be suitable for men taken in the mass.

Such were the orders of the Persian leader, and such the exercises of
the Persian troops. [25] For their quarters, he arranged that a
separate shelter should be assigned to every brigadier, and that it
should be large enough for the whole regiment he commanded; a regiment
consisting of 100 men. Thus they were encamped by regiments, and in
the mere fact of common quarters there was this advantage, Cyrus
thought, for the coming struggle, that the men saw they were all
treated alike, and therefore no one could pretend that he was
slighted, and no one sink to the confession that he was a worse man
than his neighbours when it came to facing the foe. Moreover the life
in common would help the men to know each other, and it is only by
such knowledge, as a rule, that a common conscience is engendered;
those who live apart, unknowing and unknown, seem far more apt for
mischief, like those who skulk in the dark. [26] Cyrus thought the
common life would lead to the happiest results in the discipline of
the regiments. By this system all the officers--brigadiers, company-
captains, captains of the squads--could keep their men in as perfect
order as if they were marching before them in single file. [27] Such
precision in the ranks would do most to guard against disorder and
re-establish order if ever it were broken; just as when timbers and
stones have to be fitted together it is easy enough to put them into
place, wherever they chance to lie, provided only that they are marked
so as to leave no doubt where each belongs. [28] And finally, he felt,
there was the fact that those who live together are the less likely to
desert one another; even the wild animals, Cyrus knew, who are reared
together suffer terribly from loneliness when they are severed from
each other.

[29] There was a further matter, to which he gave much care; he wished
no man to take his meal at morning or at night till he had sweated for
it. He would lead the men out to hunt, or invent games for them, or if
there was work to be done, he would so conduct it that they did not
leave it without sweat. He believed this regimen gave them zest for
their food, was good for their health, and increased their powers of
toil; and the toil itself was a blessed means for making the men more
gentle towards each other; just as horses that work together grow
gentle, and will stand quietly side by side. Moreover the knowledge of
having gone through a common training would increase tenfold the
courage with which they met the foe.

[30] Cyrus had his own quarters built to hold all the guests he might
think it well to entertain, and, as a rule, he would invite such of
the brigadiers as the occasion seemed to call for, but sometimes he
would send for the company-captains and the officers in command of the
smaller squads, and even the private soldiers were summoned to his
board, and from time to time a squad of five, or of ten, or an entire
company, or even a whole regiment, or he would give a special
invitation by way of honour to any one whom he knew had undertaken
some work he had at heart himself. In every case there was no
distinction whatever between the meats for himself and for his guests.
[31] Further he always insisted that the army servants should share
and share alike with the soldiers in everything, for he held that
those who did such service for the army were as much to be honoured as
heralds or ambassadors. They were bound, he said, to be loyal and
intelligent, alive to all a soldier's needs, active, swift,
unhesitating, and withal cool and imperturbable. Nor was that all; he
was convinced that they ought also to possess those qualities which
are thought to be peculiar to what we call "the better classes," and
yet never despise their work, but feel that everything their commander
laid upon them must be fit for them to do.

[C.2] It was the constant aim of Cyrus whenever he and his soldiers
messed together, that the talk should be lively and full of grace, and
at the same time do the listeners good. Thus one day he brought the
conversation round to the following theme:--

"Do you think, gentlemen," said he, "that our new comrades appear
somewhat deficient in certain respects simply because they have not
been educated in the same fashion as ourselves? Or will they show
themselves our equals in daily life and on the field of battle when
the time comes to meet the foe?"

[2] Hystaspas took up the challenge:--"What sort of warriors they will
prove I do not pretend to know, but this I do say, in private life
some of them are cross-grained fellows enough. Only the other day," he
went on, "Cyaxares sent a present of sacrificial meat to every
regiment. There was flesh enough for three courses apiece or more, and
the attendant had handed round the first, beginning with myself. So
when he came in again, I told him to begin at the other end of the
board, and serve the company in that order. [3] But I was greeted by a
yell from the centre: one of these men who was sitting there bawled
out, 'Equality indeed! There's not much of it here, if we who sit in
the middle are never served first at all!' It nettled me that they
should fancy themselves treated worse than we, so I called him up at
once and made him sit beside me. And I am bound to say he obeyed that
order with the most exemplary alacrity. But when the dish came round
to us, we found, not unnaturally, since we were the last to be served,
that only a few scraps were left. At this my man fell into the deepest
dudgeon, and made no attempt to conceal it, muttering to himself,
'Just like my ill-luck! To be invited here just now and never before!'
[4] I tried to comfort him. 'Never mind,' I said, 'presently the
servant will begin again with us, and then you will help yourself
first and you can take the biggest piece.' Just then the third course,
and, as it proved, the last, came round, and so the poor fellow took
his helping, but as he did so it struck him that the piece he had
chosen first was too small, and he put it back, meaning to pick out
another. But the carver, thinking he had changed his mind and did not
want any more, passed on to the next man before he had time to secure
his second slice. [5] At this our friend took his loss so hard that he
only made matters worse: his third course was clean gone, and now in
his rage and his bad luck he somehow managed to overset the gravy,
which was all that remained to him. The captain next to us seeing how
matters stood rubbed his hands with glee and went into peals of
laughter. And," said Hystaspas, "I took refuge in a fit of coughing
myself, for really I could not have controlled my laughter. There,
Cyrus," said he, "that is a specimen of our new comrades, as nearly as
I can draw his portrait."

[6] The description, as may be guessed, was greeted with shouts of
laughter, and then another brigadier took up the word: "Well, Cyrus,"
said he, "our friend here has certainly met with an absolute boor: my
own experience is somewhat different. You remember the admonitions you
gave us when you dismissed the regiments, and how you bade each of us
instruct his own men in the lessons we had learnt from you. Well, I,
like the rest of us, went off at once and set about instructing one of
the companies under me. I posted the captain in front with a fine
young fellow behind him, and after them the others in the order I
thought best; I took my stand facing them all, and waited, with my
eyes fixed on the captain, until I thought the right moment had come,
and then I gave the order to advance. [7] And what must my fine fellow
do but get in front of the captain and march off ahead of the whole
troop. I cried out, 'You, sir, what are you doing?' 'Advancing as you
ordered.' 'I never ordered you to advance alone,' I retorted, 'the
order was given to the whole company.' At which he turned right round
and addressed the ranks: 'Don't you hear the officer abusing you? The
orders are for all to advance!' Whereupon the rest of them marched
right past their captain and up to me. [8] Of course the captain
called them back, and they began to grumble and growl: 'Which of the
two are we to obey? One tells us to advance, the other won't let us
move.'

"Well, I had to take the whole matter very quietly and begin again
from the beginning, posting the company as they were, and explaining
that no one in the rear was to move until the front rank man led off:
all they had to do was to follow the man in front. [9] As I was
speaking, up came a friend of mine; he was going off to Persia, and
had come to ask me for a letter I had written home. So I turned to the
captain who happened to know where I had left the letter lying, and
bade him fetch it for me. Off he ran, and off ran my young fellow at
his heels, breast-plate, battle-axe, and all. The rest of the company
thought they were bound to follow suit, joined in the race, and
brought my letter back in style. That is how my company, you see,
carries out your instructions to the full."

[10] He paused, and the listeners laughed to their hearts' content, as
well as they might, over the triumphant entry of the letter under its
armed escort. Then Cyrus spoke:

"Now heaven be praised! A fine set they are, these new friends of
ours, a most rare race! So grateful are they for any little act of
courtesy, you may win a hundred hearts by a dish of meat! And so
docile, some of them must needs obey an order before they have
understood it! For my part I can only pray to be blest with an army
like them all."

[11] Thus he joined in the mirth, but he turned the laughter to the
praise of his new recruits.

Then one of the company, a brigadier called Aglatadas, a somewhat
sour-tempered man, turned to him and said:

"Cyrus, do you really think the tales they tell are true?"

"Certainly," he answered, "why should they say what is false?"

"Why," repeated the other, "simply to raise a laugh, and make a brag
like the impostors that they are." [12] But Cyrus cut him short,
"Hush! hush! You must not use such ugly names. Let me tell you what an
impostor is. He is a man who claims to be wealthier or braver than he
is in fact, and who undertakes what he can never carry out, and all
this for the sake of gain. But he who contrives mirth for his friends,
not for his own profit, or his hearers' loss, or to injure any man,
surely, if we must needs give him a name, we ought to call him a man
of taste and breeding and a messenger of wit."

[13] Such was the defence of Cyrus in behalf of the merrymakers. And
the officer who had begun the jest turned to Aglatadas and said:

"Just think, my dear sir, if we had tried to make you weep! What fault
you would have found with us! Suppose we had been like the ballad-
singers and story-tellers who put in lamentable tales in the hope of
reducing their audience to tears! What would you have said about us
then? Why, even now, when you know we only wish to amuse you, not to
make you suffer, you must needs hold us up to shame."

[14] "And is not the shame justified?" Aglatadas replied. "The man
who sets himself to make his fellows laugh does far less for them than
he who makes them weep. If you will but think, you will admit that
what I say is true. It is through tears our fathers teach self-control
unto their sons, and our tutors sound learning to their scholars, and
the laws themselves lead the grown man to righteousness by putting him
to sit in the place of penitence. But your mirth-makers, can you say
they benefit the body or edify the soul? Can smiles make a man a
better master or a better citizen? Can he learn economy or
statesmanship from a grin?"

[15] But Hystaspas answered back:

"Take my advice, Aglatadas, pluck up heart and spend this precious
gift of yours on your enemies: make them sit in the seat of the
sorrowful, and fling away on us, your friends, that vile and worthless
laughter. You must have an ample store of it in reserve: it cannot be
said you have squandered it on yourself, or ever wasted a smile on
friend or foreigner if you could help it. So you have no excuse to be
niggardly now, and cannot refuse us a smile."

"I see," said Aglatadas, "you are trying to get a laugh out of me,
are you not?"

But the brigadier interposed, "Then he is a fool for his pains, my
friend: one might strike fire out of you, perhaps, but not a laugh,
not a laugh."

[16] At this sally all the others shouted with glee, and even
Aglatadas could not help himself: he smiled.

And Cyrus, seeing the sombre face light up said:

"Brigadier, you are very wrong to corrupt so virtuous a man, luring
him to laughter, and that too when he is the sworn foe of gaiety."

So they talked and jested. [17] And then Chrysantas began on another
theme.

[18] "Cyrus," he said, "and gentlemen all, I cannot help seeing that
within our ranks are men of every kind, some better and some worse,
and yet if anything is won every man will claim an equal share. Now to
my mind nothing is more unfair than that the base man and the good
should be held of equal account."

"Perhaps it would be best, gentlemen," said Cyrus in answer, "to bring
the matter before the army in council and put it to them, whether, if
God grant us success, we should let all share and share alike, or
distribute the rewards and honours in proportion to the deserts of
each."

[19] "But why," asked Chrysantas, "why discuss the point? Why not
simply issue a general order that you intend to do this? Was not that
enough in the case of the competitions?"

"Doubtless," Cyrus answered, "but this case is different. The troops,
I take it, will feel that all they win by their services on the
campaign should belong to them in common: but they hold that the
actual command of the expedition was mine by right even before we left
home, so that I was fully entitled, on their view, to appoint umpires
and judges at my own will."

[20] "And do you really expect," asked Chrysantas, "that the mass of
the army will pass a resolution giving up the right of all to an equal
share in order that the best men should receive the most?"

"Yes, I do," said Cyrus, "partly because we shall be there to argue
for that course, but chiefly because it would seem too base to deny
that he who works the hardest and does most for the common good
deserves the highest recompense. Even the worst of men must admit that
the brave should gain the most."

[21] It was, however, as much for the sake of the Peers themselves as
for any other reason that Cyrus wished the resolution to be passed.
They would prove all the better men, he thought, if they too were to
be judged by their deeds and rewarded accordingly. And this was the
right moment, he felt, to raise the question and put it to the vote,
now when the Peers were disposed to resent being put on a level with
the common people. In the end it was agreed by all the company that
the question should be raised, and that every one who claimed to call
himself a man was bound to argue in its favour.

[22] And on that one of the brigadiers smiled to himself and said: "I
know at least one son of the soil who will be ready to agree that the
principle of share and share alike should not be followed everywhere."

"And who is he?" another asked.

"Well," said the first, "he is a member of our quarters, I can tell
you that, and he is always hunting after the lion's share of every
single thing."

"What? Of everything?" said a third. "Of work as well?" "Oh, no!" said
the first, "you have caught me there. I was wrong to say so much, I
must confess. When it comes to work, I must admit, he is quite ready
to go short: he will give up his own share of that, without a murmur,
to any man whatever."

[23] "For my part, gentlemen," said Cyrus, "I hold that all such
idlers ought to be turned out of the army, that is, if we are ever to
cultivate obedience and energy in our men. The bulk of our soldiers, I
take it, are of the type to follow a given lead: they will seek after
nobleness and valour if their leaders are valiant and noble, but after
baseness if these are base. [24] And we know that only too often the
worthless will find more friends than the good. Vice, passing lightly
along her path of pleasure, wins the hearts of thousands with her
gifts; but Virtue, toiling up the steep ascent, has little skill to
snare the souls of men and draw them after her, when all the while
their comrades are calling to them on the easy downward way. [25] It
is true there are degrees, and where the evil springs only from sloth
and lethargy, I look on the creatures as mere drones, only injuring
the hive by what they cost: but there are others, backward in toil and
forward in greed, and these are the captains in villainy: for not
seldom can they show that rascality has its advantages. Such as they
must be removed, cut out from among us, root and branch. [26] And I
would not have you fill their places from our fellow-citizens alone,
but, just as you choose your horses from the best stocks, wherever you
find them, not limiting yourselves to the national breed, so you have
all mankind before you, and you should choose those, and those only,
who will increase your power and add to your honour. Let me clinch my
argument by examples: no chariot can travel fast if the horses in the
team are slow, or run straight if they will not be ruled; no house can
stand firm if the household is evil: better empty walls than traitors
who will bring it to the ground.

[27] "And be sure, my friends," he added, "the removal of the bad
means a benefit beyond the sheer relief that they are taken away and
will trouble us no more: those who are left and were ripe for
contagion are purified, and those who were worthy will cleave to
virtue all the closer when they see the dishonour that falls on
wickedness."

[28] So Cyrus spoke, and his words won the praise of all his friends,
and they set themselves to do as he advised.

But after that Cyrus began to jest again. His eye fell on a certain
captain who had chosen for his comrade at the feast a great hairy lad,
a veritable monster of ugliness, and Cyrus called to the captain by
name: "How now, Sambulas? Have you adopted the Hellenic fashion too?
And will you roam the world together, you and the lad who sits beside
you, because there is none so fair as he?" "By heaven," answered
Sambulas, "you are not far wrong. It is bliss to me to feast my eyes
upon him." [29] At that all the guests turned and looked on the young
man's face, but when they saw how ugly it was, they could not help
laughing outright. "Heavens, Sambulas, tell us the valiant deed that
knit your souls together! How has he drawn you to himself?" [30]
"Listen then," he answered, "and I will tell you the whole truth.
Every time I call him, morning, noon, or night, he comes to me; never
yet has he excused himself, never been too busy to attend; and he
comes at a run, he does not walk. Whatever I have bidden him do, he
has always done it, and at the top of his speed. He has made all the
petty captains under him the very models of industry; he shows them,
not by word but deed, what they ought to be." [31] "And so," said
another, "for all these virtues you give him, I take it, the kiss of
kinship?" But the ugly lad broke out: "Not he! He has no great love
for work. And to kiss me, if it came to that, would mean more effort
than all his exercises."

[C.3] So the hours passed in the general's tent, from grave to gay,
until at last the third libation was poured out, and the company bent
in prayer to the gods--"Grant us all that is good"--and so broke up,
and went away to sleep.

But the next day Cyrus assembled the soldiers in full conclave, and
spoke to them: [2] "My men," he said, "my friends, the day of struggle
is at hand, and the enemy are near. The prizes of victory, if victory
is to be ours--and we must believe it will be ours, we must make it
ours--the prizes of victory will be nothing short of the enemy himself
and all that he possesses. And if the victory should be his, then, in
like manner, all the goods of the vanquished must lie at the victor's
feet. [3] Therefore I would have you take this to your hearts:
wherever those who have joined together for war remember that unless
each and every one of them play his part with zeal nothing good can
follow; there we may look for glorious success. For there nothing that
ought to be done will be left undone. But if each man thinks 'My
neighbour will toil and fight, even though my own heart should fail
and my own arm fall slack,' then, believe me, disaster is at the door
for each and all alike, and no man shall escape. [4] Such is the
ordinance of God: those who will not work out their own salvation he
gives into the hands of other men to bear rule over them. And now I
call on any man here," he added, "to stand up and say whether he
believes that virtue will best be nourished among us if he who bears
the greatest toil and takes the heaviest risk shall receive the
highest honours. Or whether we should hold that cowardice makes no
difference in the end, seeing that we all must share alike?"

[5] Thereupon Chrysantas of the Peers rose up. He was a man of
understanding, but his bodily presence was weak. And now he spoke
thus:

"I do not imagine, Cyrus, that you put this question with any belief
that cowards ought really to receive the same share as the brave. No,
you wished to make trial of us and see whether any man would dare to
claim an equal part in all that his fellows win by their nobleness,
though he never struck a single valiant stroke himself. [6] I myself,"
he continued, "am neither fleet of foot nor stout of limb, and for
aught I can do with my body, I perceive that on the day of trial
neither the first place nor the second can be mine, no, nor yet the
hundredth, nor even, it may be, the thousandth. But this I know right
well, that if our mighty men put forth all their strength, I too shall
receive such portion of our blessings as I may deserve. But if the
cowards sit at ease and the good and brave are out of heart, then I
fear that I shall get a portion, a larger than I care to think, of
something that is no blessing but a curse."

[7] And so spoke Chrysantas, and then Pheraulas stood up. He was a man
of the people, but well known to Cyrus in the old days at home and
well-beloved by him: no mean figure to look at, and in soul like a man
of noble birth. Now he spoke as follows:

[8] "Cyrus, friends, and Persians, I hold to the belief that on this
day we all start equal in that race where valour is the goal. I speak
of what I see: we are trained on the same fare; we are held worthy of
the same comradeship; we contend for the same rewards. All of us alike
are told to obey our leaders, and he who obeys most frankly never
fails to meet with honour at the hands of Cyrus. Valour is no longer
the privilege of one class alone: it has become the fairest prize that
can fall to the lot of any man. [9] And to-day a battle is before us
where no man need teach us how to fight: we have the trick of it by
nature, as a bull knows how to use his horns, or a horse his hoofs, or
a dog his teeth, or a wild boar his tusks. The animals know well
enough," he added, "when and where to guard themselves: they need no
master to tell them that. [10] I myself, when I was a little lad, I
knew by instinct how to shield myself from the blow I saw descending:
if I had nothing else, I had my two fists, and used them with all my
force against my foe: no one taught me how to do it, on the contrary
they beat me if they saw me clench my fists. And a knife, I remember,
I never could resist: I clutched the thing whenever I caught sight of
it: not a soul showed me how to hold it, only nature herself, I do
aver. I did it, not because I was taught to do it, but in spite of
being forbidden, like many another thing to which nature drove me, in
spite of my father and mother both. Yes, and I was never tired of
hacking and hewing with my knife whenever I got the chance: it did not
seem merely natural, like walking or running, it was positive joy.
[11] Well, to-day we are to fight in this same simple fashion: energy,
rather than skill, is called for, and glorious it will be to match
ourselves against our friends, the Peers of Persia. And let us
remember that the same prizes are offered to us all, but the stakes
differ: our friends give up a life of honour, the sweetest life there
can be, but we escape from years of toil and ignominy, and there can
be no life worse than that. [12] And what fires me most of all, my
friends, and sends me into the lists most gladly, is the thought that
Cyrus will be our judge: one who will give no partial verdict. I call
the gods to witness when I say that he loves a valiant man as he loves
his own soul: I have seen him give such an one more than he ever keeps
for himself. [13] And now," he added, "I know that our friends here
pride themselves upon their breeding and what it has done for them.
They have been brought up to endure hunger and thirst, cold and
nakedness, and yet they are aware that we too have been trained in the
self-same school and by a better master than they: we were taught by
Necessity, and there is no teacher so good, and none so strict. [14]
How did our friends here learn their endurance? By bearing arms,
weapons of war, tools that the wit of the whole human race has made as
light as well could be: but Necessity drove us, my fellows and myself,
to stagger under burdens so heavy that to-day, if I may speak for
myself, these weapons of mine seem rather wings to lift me than
weights to bear. [15] I for one am ready, Cyrus, to enter the lists,
and, however I prove, I will ask from you no more than I deserve: I
would have you believe this. And you," he added, turning to his
fellows, "you, men of the people, I would have you plunge into the
battle and match yourselves with these gentlemen-warriors: the fine
fellows must meet us now, for this is the people's day."

[16] That is what Pheraulas said, and many rose to follow him and
support his views. And it was resolved that each man should be
honoured according to his deserts and that Cyrus should be the judge.
So the matter ended, and all was well.

[17] Now Cyrus gave a banquet and a certain brigadier was the chief
guest, and his regiment with him. Cyrus had marked the officer one day
when he was drilling his men; he had drawn up the ranks in two
divisions, opposite each other, ready for the charge. They were all
wearing corslets and carrying light shields, but half were equipped
with stout staves of fennel, and half were ordered to snatch up clods
of earth and do what they could with these. [18] When all were ready,
the officer gave the signal and the artillery began, not without
effect: the missiles fell fast on shields and corslets, on thighs and
greaves. But when they came to close quarters the men of the staves
had their turn: they struck at thighs and hands and legs, or, if the
adversary stooped and twisted, they belaboured back and shoulders,
till they put the foe to utter rout, delivering their blows with
shouts of laughter and the glee of boys. Then there was an exchange of
weapons, and the other side had their revenge: they took the staves in
their turn, and once more the staff triumphed over the clod. [19]
Cyrus was full of admiration, partly at the inventiveness of the
commander, partly at the discipline of the men; it was good to see the
active exercise, and the gaiety of heart, and good to know that the
upshot of the battle favoured those who fought in the Persian style.
In every way he was pleased, and then and there he bade them all to
dinner. But at the feast many of the guests wore bandages, some on
their hands, others on their legs, and Cyrus saw it and asked what had
befallen them. They told him they had been bruised by the clods. [20]
"At close quarters?" said he, "or at long range?" "At long range,"
they answered, and all the club-bearers agreed that when it came to
close quarters, they had the finest sport. But here those who had been
carbonaded by that weapon broke in and protested loudly that it was
anything but sport to be clubbed at short range, and in proof thereof
they showed the weals on hand and neck and face. Thus they laughed at
one another as soldiers will; and on the next day the whole plain was
studded with combats of this type, and whenever the army had nothing
more serious in hand, this sport was their delight.

[21] Another day Cyrus noticed a brigadier who was marching his
regiment up from the river back to their quarters. They were advancing
in single file on his left, and at the proper moment he ordered the
second company to wheel round and draw up to the front alongside the
first, and then the third, and then the fourth; and when the company-
captains were all abreast, he passed the word along, "Companies in
twos," and the captains-of-ten came into line; and then at the right
moment he gave the order, "Companies in fours," and the captains of
five wheeled round and came abreast, and when they reached the tent
doors he called a halt, made them fall into single file once more, and
marched the first company in first, and then the second at its heels,
and the third and fourth behind them, and as he introduced them, he
seated them at the table, keeping the order of their entry. What Cyrus
commended was the quiet method of instruction and the care the officer
showed, and it was for that he invited him and all his regiment to
dinner in the royal tent.

[22] Now it chanced that another brigadier was among the guests, and
he spoke up and said to Cyrus: "But will you never ask my men to
dinner too? Day after day, morning and evening, whenever we come in
for a meal we do just the same as they, and when the meal is over the
hindmost man of the last company leads out his men with their
fighting-order reversed, and the next company follows, led by their
hindmost man, and then the third, and then the fourth: so that all of
them, if they have to retire before an enemy, will know how to fall
back in good order. And as soon as we are drawn up on the parade-
ground we set off marching east, and I lead off with all my divisions
behind me, in their regular order, waiting for my word. By-and-by we
march west, and then the hindmost man of the last division leads the
way, but they must still look to me for commands, though I am marching
last: and thus they learn to obey with equal promptitude whether I am
at the head or in the rear."

[23] "Do you mean to tell me," said Cyrus, "that this is a regular
rule of yours?"

"Truly yes," he answered, "as regular as our meals, heaven help us!"

"Then I hereby invite you all to dinner, and for three good reasons;
you practice your drill in both forms, you do this morning and evening
both, and by your marching and counter-marching you train your bodies
and benefit your souls. And since you do it all twice over every day,
it is only fair to give you dinner twice."

[24] "Not twice in one day, I beg you!" said the officer, "unless you
can furnish us with a second stomach apiece."

And so the conversation ended for the time. But the next day Cyrus was
as good as his word. He had all the regiment to dinner; and the day
after he invited them again: and when the other regiments knew of it
they fell to doing as they did.

[C.4] Now it chanced one day as Cyrus was holding a review, a
messenger came from Cyaxares to tell him that an embassy from India
had just arrived, and to bid him return with all despatch.

"And I bring with me," said the messenger, "a suit of splendid apparel
sent from Cyaxares himself: my lord wishes you to appear in all
possible splendour, for the Indians will be there to see you."

[2] At that Cyrus commanded the brigadier of the first regiment to
draw up to the front with his men behind him on the left in single
file, and to pass the order on to the second, and so throughout the
army. Officers and men were quick to obey; so that in a trice the
whole force on the field was drawn up, one hundred deep and three
hundred abreast, with their officers at the head. [3] When they were
in position Cyrus bade them follow his lead and off they went at a
good round pace. However the road leading to the royal quarters was
too narrow to let them pass with so wide a front and Cyrus sent word
along the line that the first detachment, one thousand strong, should
follow as they were, and then the second, and so on to the last, and
as he gave the command he led on without a pause and all the
detachments followed in due order, one behind the other. [4] But to
prevent mistakes he sent two gallopers up to the entrance with orders
to explain what should be done in case the men were at a loss. And
when they reached the gates, Cyrus told the leading brigadier to draw
up his regiment round the palace, twelve deep, the front rank facing
the building, and this command he was to pass on to the second, and
the second to the third, and so on till the last. [5] And while they
saw to this he went in to Cyaxares himself, wearing his simple Persian
dress without a trace of pomp. Cyaxares was well pleased at his
celerity, but troubled by the plainness of his attire, and said to
him, "What is the meaning of this, Cyrus? How could you show yourself
in this guise to the Indians? I wished you to appear in splendour: it
would have done me honour for my sister's son to be seen in great
magnificence."

[6] But Cyrus made answer: "Should I have done you more honour if I
had put on a purple robe, and bracelets for my arms, and a necklace
about my neck, and so presented myself at your call after long delay?
Or as now, when to show you respect I obey you with this despatch and
bring you so large and fine a force, although I wear no ornament but
the dust and sweat of speed, and make no display unless it be to show
you these men who are as obedient to you as I am myself." Such were
the words of Cyrus, and Cyaxares felt that they were just, and so sent
for the Indian ambassadors forthwith. [7] And when they entered they
gave this message:--The king of the Indians bade them ask what was the
cause of strife between the Assyrians and the Medes, "And when we have
heard you," they said, "our king bids us betake ourselves to the
Assyrian and put the same question to him, and in the end we are to
tell you both that the king of the Indians, when he has enquired into
the justice of the case, will uphold the cause of him who has been
wronged."

[8] To this Cyaxares replied:

"Then take from me this answer: we do the Assyrian no wrong nor any
injustice whatsoever. And now go and make inquiry of him, if you are
so minded, and see what answer he will give."

Then Cyrus, who was standing by, asked Cyaxares, "May I too say what
is in my mind?" "Say on," answered Cyaxares. Then Cyrus turned to the
ambassadors: "Tell your master," he said, "unless Cyaxares is
otherwise minded, that we are ready to do this: if the Assyrian lays
any injustice to our charge we choose the king of the Indians himself
to be our judge, and he shall decide between us."

[9] With that the embassy departed. And when they had gone out Cyrus
turned to his uncle and began, "Cyaxares, when I came to you I had
scant wealth of my own and of the little I brought with me only a
fragment is left. I have spent it all on my soldiers. You may wonder
at this," he added, "when it is you who have supported them, but,
believe me, the money has not been wasted: it has all been spent on
gifts and rewards to the soldiers who deserved it. [10] And I am
sure," he added, "if we require good workers and good comrades in any
task whatever, it is better and pleasanter to encourage them by kind
speeches and kindly acts than to drive them by pains and penalties.
And if it is for war that we need such trusty helpers, we can only win
the men we want by every charm of word and grace of deed. For our true
ally must be a friend and not a foe, one who can never envy the
prosperity of his leader nor betray him in the day of disaster. [11]
Such is my conviction, and such being so, I do not hide from myself
the need of money. But to look to you for everything, when I know that
you spend so much already, would be monstrous in my eyes. I only ask
that we should take counsel together so as to prevent the failure of
your funds. I am well aware that if you won great wealth, I should be
able to help myself at need, especially if I used it for your own
advantage. [12] Now I think you told me the other day that the king of
Armenia has begun to despise you, because he hears we have an enemy,
and therefore he will neither send you troops nor pay the tribute
which is due." [13] "Yes," answered Cyaxares, "such are his tricks.
And I cannot decide whether to march on him at once and try to subdue
him by force, or let the matter be for the time, for fear of adding to
the enemies we have." Then Cyrus asked, "Are his dwellings strongly
fortified, or could they be attacked?" And Cyaxares answered, "The
actual fortifications are not very strong: I took good care of that.
But he has the hill-country to which he can retire, and there for the
moment lie secure, knowing that he himself is safely out of reach,
with everything that he can convoy thither; unless we are prepared to
carry on a siege, as my father actually did."

[14] Thereupon Cyrus said, "Now if you are willing to send me with a
moderate force of cavalry--I will not ask for many men--I believe,
heaven helping me, I could compel him to send the troops and the
tribute. And I even hope that in the future he may become a firmer
friend that he is now." [15] And Cyaxares said: "I think myself they
are more likely to listen to you than to me. I have been told that his
sons were your companions in the chase when you were lads, and
possibly old habits will return and they will come over to you. Once
they were in our power, everything could be done as we desire."
"Then," said Cyrus, "this plan of ours had better be kept secret, had
it not?" "No doubt," answered Cyaxares. "In that way they would be
more likely to fall into our hands, and if we attack them they would
be taken unprepared."

[16] "Listen then," said Cyrus, "and see what you think of this. I
have often hunted the marches between your country and Armenia with
all my men, and sometimes I have taken horsemen with me from our
comrades here." "I see," said Cyaxares, "and if you chose to do the
like again it would seem only natural, but if your force was obviously
larger than usual, suspicion would arise at once." [17] "But it is
possible," said Cyrus, "to frame a pretext which would find credit
with us and with them too, if any rumour reached them. We might give
out that I intend to hold a splendid hunt and I might ask you openly
for a troop of horse."

"Admirable!" said Cyaxares. "And I shall refuse to give you more than
a certain number, my reason being that I wish to visit the outposts on
the Syrian side. And as a matter of fact," he added, "I do wish to see
them and put them in as strong a state as possible. Then, as soon as
you have started with your men, and marched, let us say, for a couple
of days, I could send you a good round number of horse and foot from
my own detachment. And when you have them at your back, you could
advance at once, and I will follow with the rest of my men as near you
as I may, close enough to appear in time of need."

[18] Accordingly, Cyaxares proceeded to muster horse and foot for his
own march, and sent provision-waggons forward to meet him on the road.
Meanwhile Cyrus offered sacrifice for the success of his expedition
and found an opportunity to ask Cyaxares for a troop of his junior
cavalry. But Cyaxares would only spare a few, though many wished to
go. Soon afterwards he started for the outposts himself with all his
horse and foot, and then Cyrus found the omens favourable for his
enterprise, and led his soldiers out as though he meant to hunt. [19]
He was scarcely on his way when a hare started up at their feet, and
an eagle, flying on the right, saw the creature as it fled, swooped
down and struck it, bore it aloft in its talons to a cliff hard by,
and did its will upon it there. The omen pleased Cyrus well, and he
bowed in worship to Zeus the King, and said to his company, "This
shall be a right noble hunt, my friends, if God so will."

[20] When he came to the borders he began the hunt in his usual way,
the mass of horse and foot going on ahead in rows like reapers,
beating out the game, with picked men posted at intervals to receive
the animals and give them chase. And thus they took great numbers of
boars and stags and antelopes and wild-asses: even to this day wild-
asses are plentiful in those parts. [21] But when the chase was over,
Cyrus had touched the frontier of the Armenian land, and there he made
the evening meal. The next day he hunted till he reached the mountains
which were his goal. And there he halted again and made the evening
meal. At this point he knew that the army from Cyaxares was advancing,
and he sent secretly to them and bade them keep about eight miles off,
and take their evening meal where they were, since that would make for
secrecy. And when their meal was over he told them to send their
officers to him, and after supper he called his own brigadiers
together and addressed them thus:

[22] "My friends, in old days the Armenian was a faithful ally and
subject of Cyaxares, but now when he sees an enemy against us, he
assumes contempt: he neither sends the troops nor pays the tribute. He
is the game we have come to catch, if catch we can. And this, I think,
is the way. You, Chrysantas," said he, "will sleep for a few hours,
and then take half the Persians with you, make for the hill country,
and seize the heights which we hear are his places of refuge when
alarmed. I will give you guides. [23] The hills, they tell us, are
covered with trees and scrub, so that we may hope you will escape
unseen: still you might send a handful of scouts ahead of you,
disguised as a band of robbers. If they should come across any
Armenians they can either make them prisoners and prevent them from
spreading the news, or at least scare them out of the way, so that
they will not realise the whole of your force, and only take measures
against a pack of thieves. [24] That is your task, Chrysantas, and now
for mine. At break of day I shall take half the foot and all the
cavalry and march along the level straight to the king's residence. If
he resists, we must fight, if he retreats along the plain we must run
him down, if he makes for the mountains, why then," said Cyrus, "it
will be your business to see that none of your visitors escape. [25]
Think of it as a hunt: we down below are the beaters rounding up the
game, and you are the men at the nets: only bear in mind that the
earths must all be stopped before the game is up, and the men at the
traps must be hidden, or they will turn back the flying quarry. [26]
One last word, Chrysantas: you must not behave now as I have known you
do in your passion for the chase: you must not sit up the whole night
long without a wink of sleep, you must let all your men have the
modicum of rest that they cannot do without. [27] Nor must you--just
because you scour the hills in the hunt without a guide, following the
lead of the quarry and that alone, checking and changing course
wherever it leads you--you must not now plunge into the wildest paths:
you must tell your guides to take you by the easiest road unless it is
much the longest. [28] In war, they say, the easiest way is the
quickest. And once more, because you can race up a mountain yourself
you are not to lead on your men at the double; suit your pace to the
strength of all. [29] Indeed, it were no bad thing if some of your
best and bravest were to fall behind here and there and cheer the
laggards on: and it would quicken the pace of all, when the column has
gone ahead, to see them racing back to their places past the marching
files."

[30] Chrysantas listened, and his heart beat high at the trust reposed
in him. He took the guides, and gave the necessary orders for those
who were to march with him, and then he lay down to rest. And when all
his men had had the sleep he thought sufficient he set out for the
hills. [31] Day dawned, and Cyrus sent a messenger to the Armenian
with these words: "Cyrus bids you see to it that you bring your
tribute and troops without delay." "And if he asks you where Cyrus is,
tell the truth and say I am on the frontier. And if he asks whether I
am advancing myself, tell the truth again and say that you do not
know. And if he enquires how many we are, bid him send some one with
you to find out."

[32] Having so charged the messenger he sent him on forthwith, holding
this to be more courteous than to attack without warning. Then he drew
up his troops himself in the order best suited for marching, and, if
necessary, for fighting, and so set forth. The soldiers had orders
that not a soul was to be wronged, and if they met any Armenians they
were to bid them to have no fear, but open a market wherever they
wished, and sell meat or drink as they chose.


NOTES

C1.5. Is this historical, i.e. /quasi/-historical? Are any of the
names real or all invented to give verisimilitude?

C1.13. Any touch of the sycophancy of the future in it? As in modern
Germany, a touch of that involved in the system of royalty.

C1.15. The raw material is good, but not worked up. Important for the
conception of Hellenic democracy (cf.  17). Daring, courage, virtue--
there is no monopoly of these things.

C1.21. (Cf. below VIII. C2.5) Worthy of Adam Smith. Xenophon has bump
of economy strongly developed; he resembles J. P.[*] in that respect.
The economic methodism, the mosaic interbedding, the architectonic
structure of it all, a part and parcel of Xenophon's genius. Was
Alexander's army a highly-organised, spiritually and materially
built-up, vitalised machine of this sort? What light does Arrian, that
younger Xenophon, throw upon it?

[* "J. P." = John Percival, Bishop of Hereford (the writer of the
Introduction to this volume), at the time the notes were written
Headmaster of Clifton College.--F.M.S.]

C1.25. Camaraderie encouraged and developed through a sense of
equality and fraternity, the life /au grand jour/ in common, producing
a common consciousness (cf. Comte and J. P.; Epaminondas and the
Sacred Band at Thebes).

C2. Contrast of subject enlivening the style--light concrete as a foil
to the last drier abstract detail. Humorous also, with a dramatising
and development of the characters, Shakespeare-wise--Hystaspas, and
the rest. Aglatadas, a type of educator we know well (cf. Eccles.
"Cocker not a child"), grim, dry person with no sense of humour.
Xenophon's own humour shines out.

C2.12. The term given to the two stories {eis tagathon}. T. E. B.[*]
could do it, or Socrates, without dullness or seeming to preach. There
is a crispness in the voice which is anti-pedantic.

[* "T. E. B." = T. E. Brown, the Manx poet, at that time a colleague
of Mr. Dakyns at Clifton.--F.M.S.]

C2.19. Cyrus recognises the ideal principle of co-operation and
collective ownership. Xenophon, Economist, ahead of the moderns.

C2.26. Xenophon's breadth of view: virtue is not confined to citizens,
but we have the pick of the whole world. Cosmopolitan Hellenism.

C3.4. Xenophon's theory of rule (cf. Ruskin): a right, inalienable,
God-bestowed, of the virtuous; subjection an inevitable consequence on
lack of self-discipline.

C3.5, init. Is this a carelessness, or what? Chrysantas has been
introduced before, but here he is described as if stepping on the
stage for the first time. The sentence itself suggests the mould for
the New Testament narrative.

C3.7. Pheraulas, and of him we shall hear much. A sharp contrast to
Chrysantas, the Peer, with his pointed plebeian similes. His speech
important again for Xenophon's sympathetic knowledge of children and
also of the hard-working poor.

C3.10. How true to nature this. Cannot one see the little boy doubling
his little fists, a knife in his pocket, possibly a ball of string?

C3.11. Is there a touch of flunkeyism in this? Not so; it is the
clear-sighted scientific Greek, that is all.

C3.14. Very Scotch all this.

C3.21-22. /Locus classicus/ for regimental marching tactics. Qy.: Are
any of these tactical improvements by Xenophon himself?

[C3.21. The "regiment" of a hundred men was divided into four
"companies" of twenty-five, to each of these one company-captain and
twenty-four men, viz.: twenty privates, two captains-of-ten, and two
captains-of-five, the two captains of ten having also especial charge
over the two remaining squads of five. A condensed diagram may make
the little manuvre clear. An X represents one group of five plus its
captain, either a captain-of-five or a captain-of-ten. A C represents
a company-captain.

  First position--One long column. All in single file.

  Second position--Four columns. Single file for each company.

  Third position--Eight columns. Double files.

  Fourth position--Sixteen columns. Quadruple files.

    C      C   C       C     C          C       C
    X      X   X  ->  X X   X X  ->  X X X X X X X X
    X  ->  X   X      X X   X X
    X      X   X
    X      X   X
    C
    X
    X
    X
    X]

C4.15. Cyaxares means to kidnap them, doesn't he? That is not quite
Cyrus' method. If so, it contrasts Cyaxares and Cyrus again.

C4.17. Cyaxares the old fox improves upon the plan.

C4.30, init. It is these touches which give the thrilling subjective
feeling to the writings of Xenophon, or, rather, thus his nerves
tingle, just as the external touches give a sense of objective health
(e.g. above, C1.29).

C4.32. All this is entirely modern, never yet excelled, I imagine.



BOOK III

[C.1] Thus Cyrus made his preparations. But the Armenian, when he
heard what the messenger had to say, was terror-stricken: he knew the
wrong he had done in neglecting the tribute and withholding the
troops, and, above all, he was afraid it would be discovered that he
was beginning to put his palace in a fit state for defence. [2]
Therefore, with much trepidation, he began to collect his own forces,
and at the same time he sent his younger son Sabaris into the hills
with the women, his own wife, and the wife of his elder son and his
daughters, taking the best of their ornaments and furniture with them
and an escort to be their guide. Meanwhile he despatched a party to
discover what Cyrus was doing, and organised all the Armenian
contingents as they came in. But it was not long before other
messengers arrived, saying that Cyrus himself was actually at hand.
[3] Then his courage forsook him; he dared not come to blows and he
withdrew. As soon as the recruits saw this they took to their heels,
each man bent on getting his own property safely out of the way. When
Cyrus saw the plains full of them, racing and riding everywhere, he
sent out messengers privately to explain that he had no quarrel with
any who stayed quietly in their homes, but if he caught a man in
flight, he warned them he would treat him as an enemy. Thus the
greater part were persuaded to remain, though there were some who
retreated with the king.

[4] But when the escort with the women came on the Persians in the
mountain, they fled with cries of terror, and many of them were taken
prisoners. In the end the young prince himself was captured, and the
wife of the king, and his daughters, and his daughter-in-law, and all
the goods they had with them. And when the king learnt what had
happened, scarcely knowing where to turn, he fled to the summit of a
certain hill. [5] Cyrus, when he saw it, surrounded the spot with his
troops and sent word to Chrysantas, bidding him leave a force to guard
the mountains and come down to him. So the mass of the army was
collected under Cyrus, and then he sent a herald to the king with this
enquiry:

"Son of Armenia, will you wait here and fight with hunger and thirst,
or will you come down into the plain and fight it out with us?" But
the Armenian answered that he wished to fight with neither. [6] Cyrus
sent again and asked, "Why do you sit there, then, and refuse to come
down?" "Because I know not what to do," answered the other. "It is
simple enough," said Cyrus, "come down and take your trial." "And who
shall try me?" asked the king. "He," answered Cyrus, "to whom God has
given the power to treat you as he lists, without a trial at all."

Thereupon the Armenian came down, yielding to necessity, and Cyrus
took him and all that he had and placed him in the centre of the camp,
for all his forces were now at hand.

[7] Meanwhile Tigranes, the elder son of the king, was on his way home
from a far country. In old days he had hunted with Cyrus and been his
friend, and now, when he heard what had happened, he came forward just
as he was; but when he saw his father and his mother, his brother and
sisters, and his own wife all held as prisoners, he could not keep
back the tears. [8] But Cyrus gave him no sign of friendship or
courtesy, and only said, "You have come in time, you may be present
now to hear your father tried." With that he summoned the leaders of
the Persians and the Medes, and any Armenian of rank and dignity who
was there, nor would he send away the women as they sat in covered
carriages, but let them listen too. [9] When all was ready he began:
"Son of Armenia, I would counsel you, in the first place, to speak the
truth, so that at least you may stand free from what deserves the
utmost hate: beyond all else, be assured, manifest lying checks the
sympathy of man and man. Moreover," said he, "your own sons, your
daughters, and your wife are well aware of all that you have done, and
so are your own Armenians who are here: if they perceive that you say
what is not true, they must surely feel that out of your own lips you
condemn yourself to suffer the uttermost penalty when I learn the
truth." "Nay," answered the king, "ask me whatever you will, and I
will answer truly, come what come may." [10] "Answer then," said
Cyrus, "did you once make war upon Astyages, my mother's father, and
his Medes?" "I did," he answered. "And were you conquered by him, and
did you agree to pay tribute and furnish troops whenever he required,
and promise not to fortify your dwellings?" "Even so," he said. "Why
is it, then, that to-day you have neither brought the tribute nor sent
the troops, and are building forts?" "I set my heart on liberty: it
seemed to me so fair a thing to be free myself and to leave freedom to
my sons." [11] "And fair and good it is," said Cyrus, "to fight for
freedom and choose death rather than slavery, but if a man is worsted
in war or enslaved by any other means and then attempts to rid himself
of his lord, tell me yourself, would you honour such a man as upright,
and a doer of noble deeds, or would you, if you got him in your power,
chastise him as a malefactor?" "I would chastise him," he answered,
"since you drive me to the truth." [12] "Then answer me now, point by
point," said Cyrus. "If you have an officer and he does wrong, do you
suffer him to remain in office, or do you set up another in his
stead?" "I set up another." "And if he have great riches, to you leave
him all his wealth, or do you make him a beggar?" "I take away from
him all that he has." "And if you found him deserting to your enemies,
what would you do?" "I would kill him," he said: "why should I perish
with a lie on my lips rather than speak the truth and die?"

[13] But at this his son rent his garments and dashed the tiara from
his brows, and the women lifted up their voices in wailing and tore
their cheeks, as though their father was dead already, and they
themselves undone. But Cyrus bade them keep silence, and spoke again.
"Son of Armenia, we have heard your own judgment in this case, and now
tell us, what ought we to do?" But the king sat silent and perplexed,
wondering whether he should bid Cyrus put him to death, or act in the
teeth of the rule he had laid down for himself. [14] Then his son
Tigranes turned to Cyrus and said, "Tell me, Cyrus, since my father
sits in doubt, may I give counsel in his place and say what I think
best for you?"

Now Cyrus remembered that, in the old hunting days, he had noticed a
certain man of wisdom who went about with Tigranes and was much
admired by him, and he was curious to know what the youth would say.
So he readily agreed and bade him speak his mind.

[15] "In my view, then," said Tigranes, "if you approve of all that my
father has said and done, certainly you ought to do as he did, but if
you think he has done wrong, then you must not copy him."

"But surely," said Cyrus, "the best way to avoid copying the wrongdoer
is to practise what is right?"

"True enough," answered the prince.

"Then on your own reasoning, I am bound to punish your father, if it
is right to punish wrong."

"But would you wish your vengeance to do you harm instead of good?"

"Nay," said Cyrus, "for then my vengeance would fall upon myself."

[16] "Even so," said Tigranes, "and you will do yourself the greatest
harm if you put your own subjects to death just when they are most
valuable to you."

"Can they have any value," asked Cyrus, "when they are detected doing
wrong?"

"Yes," answered Tigranes, "if that is when they turn to good and learn
sobriety. For it is my belief, Cyrus, that without this virtue all
others are in vain. What good will you get from a strong man or a
brave if he lack sobriety, be he never so good a horseman, never so
rich, never so powerful in the state? But with sobriety every friend
is a friend in need and every servant a blessing."

[17] "I take your meaning," answered Cyrus; "your father, you would
have me think, has been changed in this one day from a fool into a
wise and sober-minded man?"

"Exactly," said the prince.

"Then you would call sober-mindedness a condition of our nature, such
as pain, not a matter of reason that can be learnt? For certainly, if
he who is to be sober-minded must learn wisdom first, he could not be
converted from folly in a day."

[18] "Nay, but, Cyrus," said the prince, "surely you yourself have
known one man at least who out of sheer folly has set himself to fight
a stronger man than he, and on the day of defeat his senselessness has
been cured. And surely you have known a city ere now that has
marshalled her battalions against a rival state, but with defeat she
changes suddenly and is willing to obey and not resist?"

[19] "But what defeat," said Cyrus, "can you find in your father's
case to make you so sure that he has come to a sober mind?"

"A defeat," answered the young man, "of which he is well aware in the
secret chambers of his soul. He set his heart on liberty, and he has
found himself a slave as never before: he had designs that needed
stealth and speed and force, and not one of them has he been able to
carry through. With you he knows that design and fulfilment went hand
in hand; when you wished to outwit him, outwit him you did, as though
he had been blind and deaf and dazed; when stealth was needed, your
stealth was such that the fortresses he thought his own you turned
into traps for him; and your speed was such that you were upon him
from miles away with all your armament before he found time to muster
the forces at his command."

[20] "So you think," said Cyrus, "that merely to learn another is
stronger than himself is defeat enough to bring a man to his senses?"

"I do," answered Tigranes, "and far more truly than mere defeat in
battle. For he who is conquered by force may fancy that if he trains
he can renew the war, and captured cities dream that with the help of
allies they will fight again one day, but if we meet with men who are
better than ourselves and whom we recognise to be so, we are ready to
obey them of our own free will." [21] "You imagine then," said Cyrus,
"that the bully and the tyrant cannot recognise the man of self-
restraint, nor the thief the honest man, nor the liar the truth-
speaker, nor the unjust man the upright? Has not your own father lied
even now and broken his word with us, although he knew that we had
faithfully observed every jot and tittle of the compact Astyages
made?" [22] "Ah, but," replied the prince, "I do not pretend that the
bare knowledge alone will bring a man to his senses, it cannot cure
him unless he pays the penalty as my father pays it to-day." "But,"
answered Cyrus, "your father has suffered nothing at all so far:
although he fears, I know, that the worst suffering may be his." [23]
"Do you suppose then," asked Tigranes, "that anything can enslave a
man more utterly than fear? Do you not know that even the men who are
beaten with the iron rod of war, the heaviest rod in all the world,
may still be ready to fight again, while the victims of terror cannot
be brought to look their conquerors in the face, even when they try to
comfort them?" "Then, you maintain," said Cyrus, "that fear will
subdue a man more than suffering?" [24] "Yes," he answered, "and you
of all men know that what I say is true: you know the despondency men
feel in dread of banishment, or on the eve of battle facing defeat, or
sailing the sea in peril of shipwreck--they cannot touch their food or
take their rest because of their alarm: while it may often be that the
exiles themselves, the conquered, or the enslaved, can eat and sleep
better than men who have not known adversity. [25] Think of those
panic-stricken creatures who through fear of capture and death have
died before their day, have hurled themselves from cliffs, hanged
themselves, or set the knife to their throats; so cruelly can fear,
the prince of horrors, bind and subjugate the souls of men. And what,
think you, does my father feel at this moment? He, whose fears are not
for himself alone, but for us all, for his wife, and for his
children." [26] And Cyrus said, "To-day and at this time, it may be
with him as you say: but I still think that the same man may well be
insolent in good fortune and cringing in defeat: let such an one go
free again, and he will return to his arrogance and trouble us once
more." [27] "I do not deny it, Cyrus," said the prince. "Our offences
are such that you may well mistrust us: but you have it in your power
to set garrisons in our land and hold our strong places and take what
pledges you think best. And even so," he added, "you will not find
that we fret against our chains, for we shall remember we have only
ourselves to blame. Whereas, if you hand over the government to some
who have not offended, they may either think that you mistrust them,
and thus, although you are their benefactor, you cannot be their
friend, or else in your anxiety not to rouse their enmity you may
leave no check on their insolence, and in the end you will need to
sober them even more than us." [28] "Nay, but by all the gods," cried
Cyrus, "little joy should I ever take in those who served me from
necessity alone. Only if I recognise some touch of friendship or
goodwill in the help it is their duty to render, I could find it
easier to forgive them all their faults than to accept the full
discharge of service paid upon compulsion by those who hate me."

Then Tigranes answered, "You speak of friendship, but can you ever
find elsewhere so great a friendship as you may find with us?" "Surely
I can," he answered, "and with those who have never been my enemies,
if I choose to be their benefactor as you would have me yours." [29]
"But to-day, and now, can you find another man in the world whom you
could benefit as you can benefit my father? Say you let a man live who
has never done you wrong, will he be grateful for the boon? Say he
need not lose his children and his wife, will he love you for that
more than one who knows he well deserved the loss? Say he may not sit
upon the throne of Armenia, will he suffer from that as we shall
suffer? And is it not clear that the one who feels the pain of
forfeiture the most will be the one most grateful for the granting of
the gift? [30] And if you have it at all at heart to leave matters
settled here, think for yourself, and see where tranquillity will lie
when your back is turned. Will it be with the new dynasty, or with the
old familiar house? And if you want as large a force as possible at
your command, where will you find a man better fitted to test the
muster-roll than the general who has used it time and again? If you
need money, who will provide the ways and means better than he who
knows and can command all the resources of the country? I warn you as
a friend," he added, "that if you throw us aside you will do yourself
more harm than ever my father could have done."

[31] Such were the pleadings of the prince, and Cyrus, as he listened,
was overjoyed, for he felt he would accomplish to the full all he had
promised Cyaxares; his own words came back to him, "I hope to make the
Armenian a better friend than before."

Thereupon he turned to the king and said, "Son of Armenia, if I were
indeed to hearken unto you and yours in this, tell me, how large an
army would you send me and how much money for the war?"

[32] And the king replied, "The simplest answer I can make and the
most straightforward is to tell you what my power is, and then you may
take the men you choose, and leave the rest to garrison the country.
And so with the money: it is only fair that you should know the whole
of our wealth, and with that knowledge to guide you, you will take
what you like and leave what you like." [33] And Cyrus said, "Tell me
then, and tell me true: how great is your power and your wealth?"
Whereupon the Armenian replied: "Our cavalry is 8000 strong and our
infantry 40,000; and our wealth," said he, "if I include the treasures
which my father left, amounts in silver to more than 3000 talents."

[34] And Cyrus, without more ado, said at once, "Of your whole
armament you shall give me half, not more, since your neighbours the
Chaldaeans are at war with you: but for the tribute, instead of the
fifty talents which you paid before, you shall hand over twice as much
to Cyaxares because you made default; and you will lend me another
hundred for myself, and I hereby promise you, if God be bountiful, I
will requite you for the loan with things of higher worth, or I will
pay the money back in full, if I can; and if I cannot, you may blame
me for want of ability, but not for want of will." [35] But the
Armenian cried, "By all the gods, Cyrus, speak not so, or you will put
me out of heart. I beg you to look on all I have as yours, what you
leave behind as well as what you take away."

"So be it then," answered Cyrus, "and to ransom your wife, how much
money would you give?" "All that I have," said he. "And for your
sons?" "For them too, all that I have." "Good," answered Cyrus, "but
is not that already twice as much as you possess? [36] And you,
Tigranes," said he, "at what price would you redeem your bride?" Now
the youth was but newly wedded, and his wife was beyond all things
dear to him. "I would give my life," said he, "to save her from
slavery." [37] "Take her then," said Cyrus, "she is yours. For I hold
that she has never yet been made a prisoner, seeing that her husband
never deserted us. And you, son of Armenia," said he, turning to the
king, "you shall take home your wife and children, and pay no ransom
for them, so that they shall not feel they come to you from slavery.
But now," he added, "you shall stay and sup with us, and afterwards
you shall go wherever you wish."

And so the Armenians stayed. [38] But when the company broke up after
the evening meal, Cyrus asked Tigranes, "Tell me, where is that friend
of yours who used to hunt with us, and whom, as it seemed to me, you
admired so much?" "Do you not know," he said, "that my father put him
to death?" "And why?" said Cyrus, "what fault did he find in him?" "He
thought he corrupted me," said the youth; "and yet, I tell you, Cyrus,
he was so gentle and so brave, so beautiful in soul, that when he came
to die, he called me to him and said, 'Do not be angry with your
father, Tigranes, for putting me to death. What he does is not done
from malice, but from ignorance; and the sins of ignorance, I hold,
are unintentional.'"

[39] And at that Cyrus could not but say: "Poor soul! I grieve for
him." But the king spoke in his own defence: "Remember this, Cyrus,
that the man who finds another with his wife kills him not simply
because he believes that he has turned the woman to folly, but because
he has robbed him of her love. Even so I was jealous of that man who
seemed to put himself between my son and me and steal away his
reverence." [40] "May the gods be merciful to us!" said Cyrus, "you
did wrong, but your fault was human. And you, Tigranes," said he,
turning to the son, "you must forgive your father."

And so they talked in all friendliness and kindliness, as befitted
that time of reconciliation; and then the father and son mounted their
carriages, with their dear ones beside them, and drove away rejoicing.

[41] But when they were home again, they all spoke of Cyrus, one
praising his wisdom, another his endurance, a third the gentleness of
his nature, and a fourth his stature and his beauty. Then Tigranes
turned to his wife and asked, "Did Cyrus seem so beautiful in your
eyes?" But she answered, "Ah, my lord, he was not the man I saw." "Who
was it then?" asked Tigranes. "He," she answered, "who offered his own
life to free me from slavery."

And so they took their delight together, as lovers will, after all
their sufferings.

[42] But on the morrow the king of Armenia sent gifts of hospitality
to Cyrus and all his army, and bade his own contingent make ready to
march on the third day, and himself brought Cyrus twice the sum which
he had named. But Cyrus would take no more than he had fixed, and gave
the rest back to the king, only asking whether he or his son was to
lead the force. And the father answered that it should be as Cyrus
chose, but the son said, "I will not leave you, Cyrus, if I must carry
the baggage to follow you." [43] And Cyrus laughed and said, "What
will you take to let us tell your wife that you have become a baggage-
bearer?" "She will not need to be told," he answered, "I mean to bring
her with me, and she can see for herself all that her husband does."
"Then it is high time," said Cyrus, "that you got your own baggage
together now." "We will come," said he, "be sure of that, in good
time, with whatever baggage my father gives."

So the soldiers were the guests of Armenia for the day, and rested for
that night.

[C.2] But on the day following Cyrus took Tigranes and the best of the
Median cavalry, with chosen followers of his own, and scoured the
whole country to decide where he should build a fort. He halted on the
top of a mountain-pass and asked Tigranes where the heights lay down
which the Chaldaeans swept when they came to plunder. Tigranes showed
him. Then Cyrus asked him if the mountains were quite uninhabited.
"No, indeed," said the prince, "there are always men on the look-out,
who signal to the others if they catch sight of anything." "And what
do they do," he asked, "when they see the signal?" "They rush to the
rescue," he said, "as quickly as they can." [2] Cyrus listened and
looked, and he could see that large tracts lay desolate and untilled
because of the war. That day they came back to camp and took their
supper and slept. [3] But the next morning Tigranes presented himself
with all his baggage in order and ready for the march, 4000 cavalry at
his back, 10,000 bowmen, and as many targeteers. While they were
marching up, Cyrus offered sacrifice, and finding that the victims
were favourable, he called the leaders of the Persians together and
the chief captains of the Medes and spoke to them thus:

[4] "My friends, there lie the Chaldaean hills. If we could seize them
and set a garrison to hold the pass, we should compel them both,
Chaldaeans and Armenians alike, to behave themselves discreetly. The
victims are favourable; and to help a man in such a work as this there
is no ally half so good as speed. If we scale the heights before the
enemy have time to gather, we may take the position out of hand
without a blow, and at most we shall only find a handful of weak and
scattered forces to oppose us. [5] Steady speed is all I ask for, and
surely I could ask for nothing easier or less dangerous. To arms then!
The Medes will march on our left, half the Armenians on our right, and
the rest in the van to lead the way, the cavalry in our rear, to cheer
us on and push us forward and let none of us give way."

[6] With that Cyrus led the advance, the army in column behind him. As
soon as the Chaldaeans saw them sweeping up from the plain, they
signalled to their fellows till the heights re-echoed with answering
shouts, and the tribesmen gathered on every side. Then Cyrus sent word
along his lines, "Soldiers of Persia, they are signalling to us to
make haste. If only we reach the top before them, all they can do will
be in vain."

[7] Now the Chaldaeans were said to be the most warlike of all the
tribes in that country, and each of them was armed with a shield and a
brace of javelins. They fight for pay wherever they are needed, partly
because they are warriors born, but partly through poverty; for their
country is mountainous, and the fertile part of it small. [8] As Cyrus
and his force drew near the head of the pass, Tigranes, who was
marching at his side, said:

"Do you know, Cyrus, that before long we shall be in the thick of the
fight ourselves? Our Armenians will never stand the charge." Cyrus
answered that he was well aware of that, and immediately sent word
that the Persians should be ready to give chase at once, "as soon as
we see the Armenians decoying the enemy by feigning flight and drawing
them within our reach."

[9] Thus they marched up with the Armenians in the van: and the
Chaldaeans who had collected waited till they were almost on them, and
then charged with a tremendous shout, as their custom was, and the
Armenians, as was ever theirs, turned and ran. [10] But in the midst
of the pursuit the Chaldaeans met new opponents streaming up the pass,
armed with short swords, and some of them were cut to pieces at once
before they could withdraw, while others were taken prisoners and the
rest fled, and in a few moments the heights were won. From the top of
the pass Cyrus and his staff looked down and saw below them the
Chaldaean villages with fugitives pouring from the nearest houses.
[11] Soon the rest of the army came up, and Cyrus ordered them all to
take the morning meal. When it was over, and he had ascertained that
the look-out was really in a strong position, and well supplied with
water, he set about fortifying a post without more ado, and he bade
Tigranes send to his father and bid him come at once with all the
carpenters and stonemasons he could fetch, and while a messenger went
off to the king Cyrus did all he could with what he had at hand.

[12] Meanwhile they brought up the prisoners, all of them bound in
chains and some wounded. But Cyrus when he saw their plight ordered
the chains to be struck off, and sent for surgeons to dress their
wounds, and then he told them that he came neither to destroy them nor
to war against them, but to make peace between them and the Armenians.
"I know," he said, "before your pass was taken you did not wish for
peace. Your own land was in safety and you could harry the Armenians:
but you can see for yourselves how things stand to-day. [13]
Accordingly I will let you all go back to your homes in freedom, and I
will allow you and your fellows to take counsel together and choose
whether you will have us for your enemies or your friends. If you
decide on war, you had better not come here again without your
weapons, but if you choose peace, come unarmed and welcome: it shall
be my care to see that all is well with you, if you are my friends."

[14] And when the Chaldaeans heard that, they poured out praises and
thanks, and then they turned homewards and departed.

Meanwhile the king, receiving the call of Cyrus, and hearing the
business that was at hand, had gathered his workmen together and took
what he thought necessary and came with all speed. [15] And when he
caught sight of Cyrus, he cried: "Ah, my lord, blind mortals that we
are! How little can we see of the future, and how much we take in hand
to do! I set myself to win freedom and I made myself a slave, and now,
when we were captured and said to ourselves that we were utterly
undone, suddenly we find a safety we never had before. Those who
troubled us are taken now, even as I would have them. [16] Be well
assured, Cyrus," he added, "that I would have paid the sum you had
from me over and over again simply to dislodge the Chaldaeans from
these heights. The things of worth you promised me when you took the
money have been paid in full already, and we discover that we are not
your creditors, but deep in your debt for many kindnesses; and we
shall be ashamed not to return them, or we should be base indeed, for
try as we may, we shall never be able to requite in full so great a
benefactor."

[17] Such thanks the Armenian gave.

Then the Chaldaeans came back, begging Cyrus to make peace with them.
And Cyrus asked them: "Am I right in thinking that you desire peace
to-day because you believe it will be safer for you than war, now that
we hold these heights?"

And the Chaldaeans said that so it was. [18] "Well and good," said he.
"And what if other benefits were gained by peace?" "We should be all
the better pleased," said they. "Is there any other reason," he asked,
"for your present poverty, except your lack of fertile soil?" They
said that there was none. "Well then," Cyrus went on, "would you be
willing to pay the same dues as the Armenians, if you were allowed to
cultivate as much of their land as you desired?" And the Chaldaeans
said they would, if only they could rely on being fairly treated. [19]
"Now," said Cyrus, turning to the Armenian king, "would you like that
land of yours which is now lying idle to be tilled and made
productive, supposing the workers paid you the customary dues?" "I
would, indeed," said the king, "so much so that I am ready to pay a
large sum for it. It would mean a great increase to my revenue." [20]
"And you, Chaldaeans," said Cyrus, "with your splendid mountains,
would you let the Armenians use them for pasture if the graziers paid
you what was fair?" "Surely yes," said the Chaldaeans, "it would mean
much profit and no pains."

"Son of Armenia," said Cyrus, "would you take this land for grazing,
if by paying a small sum to the Chaldaeans you got a far greater
return yourself?"

"Right willingly," said he, "if I thought my flocks could feed in
safety."

"And would they not be safe enough," suggested Cyrus, "if this pass
were held for you?" To which the king agreed. [21] But the Chaldaeans
cried, "Heaven help us! We could not till our own fields in safety,
not to speak of theirs, if the Armenians held the pass." "True,"
answered Cyrus, "but how would it be if the pass were held for you?"
"Ah, then," said they, "all would be well enough." "Heaven help us!"
cried the Armenian in his turn, "all might be well enough for them,
but it would be ill for us if these neighbours of ours recovered the
post, especially now that it is fortified." [22] Then Cyrus said,
"See, then, this is what I will do: I will hand over the pass to
neither of you: we Persians will guard it ourselves, and if either of
you injure the other, we will step in and side with the sufferers."

[23] Then both parties applauded the decision, and said that only thus
could they establish a lasting peace, and on these terms they
exchanged pledges, and a covenant was made that both nations alike
were to be free and independent, but with common rights of marriage,
and tillage, and pasturage, and help in time of war if either were
attacked. [24] Thus the matter was concluded, and to this day the
treaty holds between the Chaldaeans and Armenia.

Peace was no sooner made than both parties began building what they
now considered their common fortress, working side by side and
bringing up all that was needed. [25] And when evening fell, Cyrus
summoned them all as fellow-guests to his board, saying that they were
friends already. At the supper as they sat together, one of the
Chaldaeans said to Cyrus that the mass of his nation would feel they
had received all they could desire, "But there are men among us," he
added, "who live as freebooters: they do not know how to labour in the
field, and they could not learn, accustomed as they are from youth up
to get their livelihood either by plundering for themselves or serving
as mercenaries, often under the king of India, for he is a man of much
wealth, but sometimes under Astyages." [26] Then Cyrus said: "Why
should they not take service with me? I undertake to give them at
least as much as they ever got elsewhere." The Chaldaeans readily
agreed with him and prophesied that he would have many volunteers.

[27] So this matter was settled to the mind of all. But Cyrus, on
hearing that the Chaldaeans were in the habit of going to India,
remembered how Indian ambassadors had come to the Medes to spy out
their affairs, and how they had gone on to their enemies--doubtless to
do the same there--and he felt a wish that they should hear something
of what he had achieved himself. [28] So he said to the company: "Son
of Armenia, and men of the Chaldaeans, I have something to ask you.
Tell me, if I were to send ambassadors to India, would you send some
of your own folk with them to show them the way, and support them in
gaining for us all that I desire? I still need more money if I am to
pay all the wages, as I wish, in full, and give rewards and make
presents to such of my soldiers as deserve them. It is for such things
I need all the money I can get, for I believe them to be essential. It
would be pleasanter for me not to draw on you, because I look on you
already as my friends, but I should be glad to take from the Indian as
much as he will give me. My messenger--the one for whom I ask guides
and coadjutors--will go to the king and say: 'Son of India, my master
has sent me to you, bidding me say that he has need of more money. He
is expecting another army from Persia,' and indeed I do expect one,"
Cyrus added. "Then my messenger will proceed, 'If you can send my
master all that you have at hand he will do his best, if God grant him
success, that you should feel your kindness has not been ill-advised.'
[30] That is what my emissary will say: and you must give such
instructions to yours as you think fit yourselves. If I get money from
the king, I shall have abundance at my disposal: if I fail, at least
we shall owe him no gratitude, and as far as he is concerned we may
look to our own interests alone."

[31] So Cyrus spoke, convinced that the ambassadors from Armenia and
Chaldaea would speak of him as he desired all men might do. And then,
as the hour was come, they broke up the meeting and took their rest.

[C.3] But on the next day Cyrus despatched his messenger with the
instructions, and the Armenians and Chaldaeans sent their own
ambassadors, choosing the men they thought would help Cyrus most and
speak of his exploits in the most fitting terms. Cyrus put a strong
garrison in the fort and stored it with supplies, and left an officer
in command, a Mede, whose appointment, he thought, would gratify
Cyaxares, and then he turned homewards, taking with him not only the
troops he had brought, but the force the Armenians had furnished, and
a picked body of Chaldaeans who considered themselves stronger than
all the rest together. [2] And as he come down from the hills into the
cultivated land, not one of the Armenians, man or woman, stayed
indoors: with one accord they all went out to meet him, rejoicing that
peace was made, and bringing him offerings from their best, driving
before them the animals they valued most. The king himself was not
ill-pleased at this, for he thought that Cyrus would take delight in
the honour the people showed him. Last of all came the queen herself,
with her daughters and her younger son, bearing many gifts, and among
them the golden treasure that Cyrus had refused before. [3] But when
he saw it he said: "Nay, you must not make me a mercenary and a
benefactor for pay; take this treasure back and hie you home, but do
not give it to your lord that he may bury it again; spend it on your
son, and send him forth gloriously equipped for war, and with the
residue buy yourself and for your husband and your children such
precious things as shall endure, and bring joy and beauty into all
your days. As for burying, let us only bury our bodies on the day when
each must die."

[4] With that he rode away, the king and all his people escorting him,
like a guard of honour, calling him their saviour, their benefactor,
and their hero, and heaping praises on him until he had left the land.
And the king sent with him a larger army than ever he had sent before,
seeing that now he had peace at home. [5] Thus Cyrus took his
departure, having gained not only the actual money he took away with
him, but a far ampler store of wealth, won by his own graciousness, on
which he could draw in time of need.

For the first night he encamped on the borders of Armenia, but the
next day he sent an army and the money to Cyaxares, who was close at
hand, as he had promised to be, while he himself took his pleasure in
hunting wherever he could find the game, in company with Tigranes and
the flower of the Persian force.

[6] And when he came back to Media he gave gifts of money to his chief
officers, sufficient for each to reward their own subordinates, for he
held to it that, if every one made his own division worthy of praise,
all would be well with the army as a whole. He himself secured
anything that he thought of value for the campaign, and divided it
among the most meritorious, convinced that every gain to the army was
an adornment to himself.

[7] At every distribution he would take occasion to address the
officers and all whom he chose to honour in some such words as these:
"My friends, the god of mirth must be with us to-day: we have found a
source of plenty, and we have the wherewithal to honour whom we wish
and as they may deserve. [8] Let us call to mind, all of us, the only
way in which these blessings can be won. We shall find it is by toil,
and watchfulness, and speed, and the resolve never to yield to our
foes. After this pattern must we prove ourselves to be men, knowing
that all high delights and all great joys are only gained by obedience
and hardihood, and through pains endured and dangers confronted in
their proper season."

[9] But presently, when Cyrus saw that his men were strong enough for
all the work of war, and bold enough to meet their enemies with scorn,
expert and skilful in the use of the weapons each man bore, and all of
them perfect in obedience and discipline, the desire grew in his heart
to be up and doing and achieve something against the foe. He knew well
how often a general has found delay ruin his fairest armament. [10] He
noticed, moreover, that in the eagerness of rivalry and the strain of
competition many of the soldiers grew jealous of each other; and for
this, if for no other reason, he desired to lead them into the enemy's
country without delay, feeling that common dangers awaken comradeship
among those who are fighting in a common cause, and then all such
bickerings cease, and no man is galled by the splendour of his
comrade's arms, or the passion of his desire for glory: envy is
swallowed up in praise, and each competitor greets his rivals with
delight as fellow-workers for the common good.

[11] Therefore Cyrus ordered his whole force to assemble under arms,
and drew them up into battle-array, using all his skill to make the
display a wonder of beauty and perfection. Then he summoned his chief
officers, his generals, his brigadiers, and his company-captains.
These men were not bound to be always in the ranks, and some were
always free to wait on the commander-in-chief or carry orders along
the lines without leaving the troops unofficered: for the captains-of-
twelve and the captains-of-six stepped into the gaps, and absolute
order was preserved. [12] So Cyrus assembled his staff and led them
along the lines, pointing out the merits of the combined forces and
the special strength of each, and thus he kindled in their hearts the
passion for achievement, and then he bade them return to their
regiments and repeat the lessons he had taught them, trying to implant
in their own men the same desire for action, so that one and all might
sally out in the best of heart; and the next morning they were to
present themselves at Cyaxares' gates. [13] So the officers went away
and did as he commanded, and the next morning at daybreak they
assembled at the trysting-place, and Cyrus met them and came before
Cyaxares and said to him:

"I know well that what I am about to say must often have been in your
own mind, but you have shrunk from suggesting it yourself lest it seem
that you were weary of supporting us. [14] Therefore since you must
keep silence, let me speak for both of us. We are all agreed that
since our preparations are complete we should not wait until the enemy
invades our territory before we give him battle, nor loiter here in a
friendly land, but attack him on his own ground with what speed we
may. [15] For while we linger here, we injure your property in spite
of ourselves, but once on the enemy's soil, we can damage his, and
that with the best will in the world. [16] As things are, you must
maintain us, and the cost is great; but once launched on foreign
service, we can maintain ourselves, and at our foe's expense. [17]
Possibly, if it were more dangerous to go forward than to stay here,
the more cautious might seem the wiser plan. But whether we stay or
whether we go, the enemy's numbers will be the same, and so will ours,
whether we receive them here or join battle with them there. [18]
Moreover, the spirit of our soldiers will be all the higher and all
the bolder if they feel that they are marching against the foe and not
cowering before him; and his alarm will be all the greater when he
hears that we are not crouching at home in terror but coming out to
meet him as soon as we have heard of his advance, eager to close at
once, not holding back until our territory suffers, but prompt to
seize the moment and ravage his own land first. [19] Indeed," he
added, "if we do no more than quicken our own courage and his fears, I
would reckon it a substantial gain, and count it so much the less
danger for us and so much the more for him. My father never tires of
telling me what I have heard you say yourself, and what all the world
admits, that battles are decided more by the character of the troops
than by their bodily strength."

[20] He ended, and Cyaxares answered:

"Cyrus, both you and all my Persian friends may feel sure that I find
it no trouble to maintain you; do not imagine such a thing; but I
agree with you that the time is ripe for an advance on the enemy's
land."

"Then," said Cyrus, "since we are all of one mind, let us make our
final preparations, and, if heaven will, let us set forth without
delay."

[21] So they bade the soldiers prepare for the start, and Cyrus
offered sacrifices to Zeus the Lord and to the other gods in due
order, and prayed, "Look on us with favour, and be gracious to us;
guide our army, stand beside us in the battle, aid us in council, help
us in action, be the comrades of the brave." Also he called upon the
Heroes of Media, who dwell in the land and guard it. [22] Then, when
the signs were favourable and his army was mustered on the frontier,
he felt that the moment had come, and with all good omens to support
him, he invaded the enemy's land. And so soon as he had crossed the
border he offered libations to the Earth and victims to the gods, and
sought to win the favour of the Heroes who guard Assyria. And having
so done, once more he sacrificed to Zeus, the god of his fathers, and
was careful to reverence every other god who came before his mind.

[23] But when these duties were fulfilled, there was no further pause.
He pushed his infantry on at once, a short day's march, and then
encamped, while the cavalry made a swift descent and captured much
spoil of every kind. For the future they had only to shift their camp
from time to time, and they found supplies in abundance, and could
ravage the enemy's land at their ease while waiting his approach. [24]
Presently news came of his advance: he was said to be barely ten days'
off, and at that Cyrus went to Cyaxares and said: "The hour has come,
and we must face the enemy. Let it not seem to friend or foe that we
fear the encounter: let us show them that we enjoy the fight."

[25] Cyaxares agreed, and they moved forward in good order, marching
each day as far as appeared desirable. They were careful to take their
evening meal by daylight, and at night they lit no fires in the camp:
they made them in front of it, so that in case of attack they might
see their assailants, while they themselves remained unseen. And often
they lit other fires in their rear as well, to deceive the enemy; so
that at times the Assyrian scouts actually fell in with the advance-
guard, having fancied from the distance of the fires that they were
still some way from the encampment.

[26] Meanwhile the Assyrians and their allies, as the two armies came
into touch, halted, and threw up an entrenchment, just as all
barbarian leaders do to-day, whenever they encamp, finding no
difficulty in the work because of the vast numbers at their command,
and knowing that cavalry may easily be thrown into confusion and
become unmanageable, especially if they are barbarians. [27] The
horses must be tethered at their stalls, and in case of attack a dozen
difficulties arise: the soldier must loose his steed in the dark,
bridle and saddle him, put on his own armour, mount, and then gallop
through the camp, and this last it is quite impossible to do.
Therefore the Assyrians, like all barbarians, throw up entrenchments
round their position, and the mere fact of being inside a fastness
leaves them, they consider, the choice of fighting at any moment they
think fit. [28] So the two armies drew nearer and nearer, and when
they were about four miles apart, the Assyrians proceeded to encamp in
the manner described: their position was completely surrounded by a
trench, but also perfectly visible, while Cyrus took all the cover he
could find, screening himself behind villages and hillocks, in the
conviction that the more sudden the disclosure of a hostile force the
greater will be the enemy's alarm.

[29] During the first night neither army did more than post the
customary guards before they went to sleep, and on the next day the
king of Assyria, and Croesus, and their officers, still kept the
troops within their lines. But Cyrus and Cyaxares drew up their men,
prepared to fight if the enemy advanced.

Ere long it was plain that they would not venture out that day, and
Cyaxares summoned Cyrus and his staff and said:

[30] "I think, gentlemen, it would be well for us to march up to the
breastworks in our present order, and show them that we wish to fight.
If we do so," he added, "and they refuse our challenge, it will
increase the confidence of our own men, and the mere sight of our
boldness will add to the enemy's alarm."

[31] So it seemed to Cyaxares, but Cyrus protested: "In the name of
heaven, Cyaxares, let us do no such thing. By such an advance we
should only reveal our numbers to them: they would watch us at their
ease, conscious that they are safe from any danger, and when we retire
without doing them any harm they will have another look at us and
despise us because of our inferiority in numbers, and to-morrow they
will come out much emboldened. [32] At present," he added, "they know
that we are here, but they have not seen us, and you may be sure they
do not despise us; they are asking what all this means, and they never
cease discussing the problem; of that I am convinced. They ought not
to see us until they sally out, and in that moment we ought to come to
grips with them, thankful to have caught them as we have so long
desired."

[33] So Cyrus spoke, and Cyaxares and the others were convinced, and
waited. In the evening they took their meal, and posted their pickets
and lit watch-fires in front of their outposts, and so turned to
sleep. [34] But early the next morning Cyrus put a garland on his head
and went out to offer sacrifice, and sent word to all the Peers of
Persia to join him, wearing garlands like himself. And when the rite
was over, he called them together and said: "Gentlemen, the
soothsayers tell us, and I agree, that the gods announce by the signs
in the victims that the battle is at hand, and they assure us of
victory, they promise us salvation. [35] I should be ashamed to
admonish you at such a season, or tell you how to bear yourselves: I
do not forget that we have all been brought up in the same school, you
have learnt the same lessons as I, and practised them day by day, and
you might well instruct others. But you may not have noticed one
point, and for this I would ask a hearing. [36] Our new comrades, the
men we desire to make our peers--it may be well to remind them of the
terms on which Cyaxares has kept us and of our daily discipline, the
goal for which we asked their help, and the race in which they
promised to be our friendly rivals. [37] Remind them also that this
day will test the worth of every man. With learners late in life, we
cannot wonder if now and then a prompter should be needed: it is much
to be thankful for if they show themselves good men and true with the
help of a reminder. [38] Moreover, while you help them you will be
putting your own powers to the test. He who can give another strength
at such a crisis may well have confidence in his own, whereas one who
keeps his ideal to himself and is content with that, ought to remember
that he is only half a man. [39] There is another reason," he added,
"why I do not speak to them myself, but ask you to do so. I want them
to try to please you: you are nearer to them than I, each of you to
the men of his own division: and be well assured that if you show
yourselves stout-hearted you will be teaching them courage, and others
too, by deeds as well as words."

[40] With that Cyrus dismissed them, and bade them break their fast
and make libation, and then take their places in the ranks, still
wearing their garlands on their heads. As they went away he summoned
the leaders of the rearguard and gave them his instructions:

[41] "Men of Persia, you have been made Peers and chosen for special
duties, because we think you equal to the best in other matters, and
wiser than most in virtue of your age. The post that you hold is every
whit as honourable as theirs who form the front: from your position in
the rear you can single out the gallant fighters, and your praise will
make them outdo themselves in valour, while if any man should be
tempted to give way, your eyes will be upon him and you will not
suffer it. [42] Victory will mean even more to you than to the others,
because of your age and the weight of your equipment. If the men in
front call on you to follow, answer readily, and let them see that you
can hold your own with them, shout back to them, and bid them lead on
quicker still. And now," said he, "go back and take your breakfast,
and then join your ranks with the rest, wearing your garlands on your
heads."

[43] Thus Cyrus and his men made their preparations, and meanwhile the
Assyrians on their side took their breakfast, and then sallied forth
boldly and drew up in gallant order. It was the king himself who
marshalled them, driving past in his chariot and encouraging his
troops.

[44] "Men of Assyria," he said, "to-day you must show your valour.
To-day you fight for your lives and your land, the land where you were
born and the homes where you were bred, and for your wives and your
children, and all the blessings that are yours. If you win, you will
possess them all in safety as before, but if you lose, you must
surrender them into the hands of your enemies. [45] Abide, therefore,
and do battle as though you were enamoured of victory. It would be
folly for her lovers to turn their backs to the foe, sightless,
handless, helpless, and a fool is he who flies because he longs to
live, for he must know that safety comes to those who conquer, but
death to those who flee; and fools are they whose hearts are set on
riches, but whose spirits are ready to admit defeat. It is the victor
who preserves his own possessions and wins the property of those whom
he overcomes: the conquered lose themselves and all they call their
own."

[46] Thus spoke the king of Assyria.

But meanwhile Cyaxares sent to Cyrus saying that the moment for attack
had come. "Although," he added, "there are as yet but few of them
outside the trenches, by the time we have advanced there will be quite
enough. Let us not wait until they outnumber us, but charge at once
while we are satisfied we can master them easily."

[47] But Cyrus answered him, "Unless those we conquer are more than
half their number, they are sure to say that we attacked when they
were few, because we were afraid of their full force, and in their
hearts they will not feel that they are beaten; and we shall have to
fight another battle, when perhaps they will make a better plan than
they have made to-day, delivering themselves into our hands one by
one, to fight with as we choose."

[48] So the messengers took back his reply, but meanwhile Chrysantas
and certain other Peers came to Cyrus bringing Assyrian deserters with
them, and Cyrus, as a general would, questioned the fugitives about
the enemy's doings, and they told him that the Assyrians were marching
out in force and that the king himself had crossed the trenches and
was marshalling his troops, addressing them in stirring words, as all
the listeners said. [49] Then Chrysantas turned to Cyrus:

"What if you also were to summon our men, while there is yet time, and
inspire them with your words?"

[50] But Cyrus answered:

"Do not be disturbed by the thought of the Assyrian's exhortations;
there are no words so fine that they can turn cowards into brave men
on the day of hearing, nor make good archers out of bad, nor doughty
spearmen, nor skilful riders, no, nor even teach men to use their arms
and legs if they have not learnt before."

[51] "But," replied Chrysantas, "could you not make the brave men
braver still, and the good better?"

"What!" cried Cyrus, "can one solitary speech fill the hearer's soul
on the selfsame day with honour and uprightness, guard him from all
that is base, spur him to undergo, as he ought, for the sake of glory
every toil and every danger, implant in him the faith that it is
better to die sword in hand than to escape by flight? [52] If such
thoughts are ever to be engraved in the hearts of men and there abide,
we must begin with the laws, and frame them so that the righteous can
count on a life of honour and liberty, while the bad have to face
humiliation, suffering, and pain, and a life that is no life at all.
[53] And then we ought to have tutors and governors to instruct and
teach and train our citizens until the belief is engendered in their
souls that the righteous and the honourable are the happiest of all
men born, and the bad and the infamous the most miserable. This is
what our men must feel if they are to show that their schooling can
triumph over their terror of the foe. [54] Surely, if in the moment of
onset, amid the clash of arms, at a time when lessons long learnt seem
suddenly wiped away, it were possible for any speaker, by stringing a
few fine sentiments together, to manufacture warriors out of hand,
why, it would be the easiest thing in all the world to teach men the
highest virtue man can know. [55] For my own part," he added, "I would
not trust our new comrades yonder, whom we have trained ourselves, to
stand firm this day unless they saw you at their side, to be examples
unto them and to remind them if they forget. As for men who are
utterly undisciplined, I should be astonished if any speech, however
splendid, did one whit more to encourage valour in their hearts than a
song well sung could do to make a musician of a man who had no music
in his soul."

[56] But while they were speaking, Cyaxares sent again, saying that
Cyrus did ill to loiter instead of advancing against the enemy with
all speed. And Cyrus sent back word there and then by the messengers:

"Tell Cyaxares once more, that even now there are not as many before
us as we need. And tell him this so that all may hear. But add that,
if it so please him, I will advance at once."

[57] So saying and with one prayer to the gods, he led his troops into
battle.

Once the advance began he quickened the pace, and his men followed in
perfect order, steadily, swiftly, joyously, brimful of emulation,
hardened by toil, trained by their long discipline, every man in the
front a leader, and all of them alert. They had laid to heart the
lesson of many a day that it was always safest and easiest to meet
enemies at close quarters, especially archers, javelin-men, and
cavalry. [58] While they were still out of range, Cyrus sent the
watchword along the lines, "Zeus our help and Zeus our leader." And as
soon as it was returned to him, he sounded the first notes of the
battle-paean, and the men took up the hymn devoutly, in one mighty
chorus. For at such times those who fear the gods have less fear of
their fellow-men. [59] And when the chant was over, the Peers of
Persia went forward side by side, radiant, high-bred, disciplined, a
band of gallant comrades; they looked into each other's eyes, they
called each other by name, with many a cheery cry, "Forward, friends,
forward, gallant gentlemen!" And the rear-ranks heard the call, and
sent back a ringing cheer, bidding the van lead on. The whole army of
Cyrus was brimming with courage and zeal and strength and hardihood
and comradeship and self-control; more terrible, I imagine, to an
opponent than aught else could be. [60] On the Assyrian side, those in
the van who fought from the chariots, as soon as the mass of the
Persian force drew near, leapt back and drove to their own main body;
but the archers, javelin-men, and slingers, let fly long before they
were in range. [61] And as the Persians steadily advanced, stepping
over the spent missiles, Cyrus called to his men:

"Forward now, bravest of the brave! Show us what your pace can be!"

They caught the word and passed it on, and in their eagerness and
passion for the fray some of the leaders broke into a run, and the
whole phalanx followed at their heels. [62] Cyrus himself gave up the
regular march and dashed forward at their head, shouting:

"Brave men to the front! Who follows me? Who will lay the first
Assyrian low?"

At this the men behind took up the shout till it rang through the
field like a battle-cry: "Who follows? Brave men to the front!" [63]
Thus the Persians closed. But the enemy could not hold their ground;
they turned and fled to their entrenchments. [64] The Persians swept
after them, many a warrior falling as they crowded in at the gates or
tumbled into the trenches. For in the rout some of the chariots were
carried into the fosse, and the Persians sprang down after them and
slew man and horse where they fell. [65] Then the Median troopers,
seeing how matters stood, charged the Assyrian cavalry, who swerved
and broke before them, chased and slaughtered, horse and rider, by
their conquerors. [66] Meanwhile the Assyrians within the camp, though
they stood upon the breastworks, had neither wit nor power to draw bow
or fling spear against the destroyers, dazed as they were by their
panic and the horror of the sight. Then came the tidings that the
Persians had cut their way through to the gates, and at that they fled
from the breastworks. [67] The women, seeing the rout in the camp,
fell to wailing and lamentations, running hither and thither in utter
dismay, young maidens, and mothers with children in their arms,
rending their garments and tearing their cheeks and crying on all they
met, "Leave us not, save us, save your children and yourselves!" [68]
Then the princes gathered the trustiest men and stood at the gates,
fighting on the breastworks themselves, and urging their troops to
make a stand. [69] Cyrus, seeing this, and fearing that if his handful
of Persians forced their way into the camp they would be overborne by
numbers, gave the order to fall back out of range. [70] Then was shown
the perfect discipline of the Peers; at once they obeyed the order and
passed it on at once. And when they were all out of range they halted
and reformed their ranks, better than any chorus could have done,
every man of them knowing exactly where he ought to be.


NOTES

C1.6. Oriental in feeling; situation well realised. Hellenic =
Oriental, also in part perhaps. Also, we know the Oriental through the
medium of Greek to a great extent (cf. Greek Testament, and earlier
still LXX.).

C1.8, init. Cf. Joseph and his brethren for this hardening of his
heart.

C1.11. Hellenic political ethics = modern in this matter, apart from
modern theory of nationalism, i.e. right of nations to exist free.

C1.12. Quite after the manner of an advocate in a Greek law-court, but
also Oriental (cf. David and Nathan the seer).

C1.24. Fear of exile; autobiographical touch? Is anything passing
through the mind of Xenophon? I dare say there is. [Xenophon was
banished from his native city of Athens because of his friendship with
Sparta and with Cyrus the Younger. See Works, Vol. I. p. xcix.]

C1.33, fin. 3000 talents. Something under 750,000.

C1.35. Cyrus drives home the conscience of indebtedness / la/ Portia
v. Shylock. N.B.--Humorous also and an Oriental tinge.

C1.38. One can't help thinking of Socrates and the people of Athens
here. If so, this is a quasi-apology for the Athenian /bons pres de
famille/ who condemned Socrates. Beautiful story of the sophist
teacher's last injunction to Tigranes.

C1.40-41. What smiles after tears! Like a sunny day succeeding clouds
and blackness. A pretty story this, of the wife of Tigranes.
/Xenophon's women:/ this one, Pantheia, Croesus' wife, the wife of
Ischomachus (/Economist/), the daughter of Gobryas.

C2.12. Archaeologically interesting. N.B.--Humanity towards wounded,
Hellenic. Xenophon's own strategy in the /Anabasis/ is probably the
prototype.

C2.15. For Hellenic and Xenophontine religiousness. The
incalculableness of human life: God fulfils himself in many unforeseen
ways. N.B.--Irony also of the situation, since Cyrus doesn't intend
the Armenian to triumph over the Chaldaean in the way he anticipates.

C2.20. Note how Socratically it is made to work itself out.

C3. Cyrus, the Archic Man, the "born ruler," is also the diplomatic
man (cf., no doubt, Gladstone), a diplomacy based on organic economic
sense and friendly-naturedness.

C3.10. Xenophon's theory of fraternity in action, all petty jealousies
brushed aside.

[C3.11. The "captains-of-twelve" and the "captains-of-six" are the
same officers as those called elsewhere "captains-of-ten" and
"captains-of-five" (cf. above Bk. II. C2.21 note). The titles vary
because sometimes the officers themselves are included in the squads
and sometimes not.]

C3.19. Nice touch, quoting his father as an authority.

C3.40. With garlands, like the Spartans. Was it conceivably a Persian
custom too?

C3.44. Assyrian's speech; not a bad one, though platitudinous.
Xenophon's dramatic form is shown in the intellectual and emotional
side of his characters, rather than by the diction in their mouths, is
it not?

C3.51-52. Most important for Xenophon, Educationalist. Cyrus on the
powerlessness of a speech to create valour in the soul of the
untrained: there must be a physical, moral, and spiritual training
there beforehand. The speech is in Xenophon's best earnest rhetorical
style.

C3.57. The march into battle, /vide/ Milton. A beautiful bit of word-
painting.

C3.58. Cf. the Prussian army singing a hymn [in 1870].



BOOK IV

[C.1] Cyrus waited, with his troops as they were, long enough to show
that he was ready to do battle again if the enemy would come out; but
as they did not stir he drew the soldiers off as far as he thought
well, and there encamped. He had guards posted and scouts sent
forward, and then he gathered his warriors round him and spoke to them
as follows:

[2] "Men of Persia, first and foremost I thank the gods of heaven with
all my soul and strength; and I know you render thanks with me, for we
have won salvation and victory, and it is meet and right to thank the
gods for all that comes to us. But in the next place I must praise
you, one and all; it is through you all that this glorious work has
been accomplished, and when I have learnt what each man's part has
been from those whose place it is to tell me, I will do my best to
give each man his due, in word and deed. [3] But I need none to tell
me the exploits of your brigadier Chrysantas; he was next to me in the
battle and I could see that he bore himself as I believe you all have
done. Moreover, at the very moment when I called on him to retire, he
had just raised his sword to strike an Assyrian down, but he heard my
voice, and at once he dropped his hand and did my bidding. He sent the
word along the lines and led his division out of range before the
enemy could lay one arrow to the string or let one javelin fly. Thus
he brought himself and his men safely out of action, because he had
learnt to obey. [4] But some of you, I see, are wounded, and when I
hear at what moment they received their wounds I will pronounce my
opinion on their deserts. Chrysantas I know already to be a true
soldier and a man of sense, able to command because he is able to
obey, and here and now I put him at the head of a thousand troops, nor
shall I forget him on the day when God may please to give me other
blessings. [5] There is one reminder I would make to all. Never let
slip the lesson of this day's encounter, and judge for yourselves
whether it is cowardice or courage that saves a man in war, whether
the fighters or the shirkers have the better chance, and what the joy
is that victory can yield. To-day of all days you can decide, for you
have made the trial and the result is fresh. [6] With such thoughts as
these in your hearts you will grow braver and better still. And now
you may rest in the consciousness that you are dear to God and have
done your duty bravely and steadily, and so take your meal and make
your libations and sing the paean and be ready for the watchword."

So saying, Cyrus mounted his horse and galloped on to Cyaxares, and
the two rejoiced together as victors will. And then, after a glance at
matters there and an inquiry if aught were needed, he rode back to his
own detachment. Then the evening meal was taken and the watches were
posted and Cyrus slept with his men.

[8] Meanwhile the Assyrians, finding that their king was among the
slain and almost all his nobles with him, fell into utter despair, and
many of them deserted during the night. And at this fear crept over
Croesus and the allies; they saw dangers on every side, and heaviest
of all was the knowledge that the leading nation, the head of the
whole expedition, had received a mortal blow. Nothing remained but to
abandon the encampment under cover of night. [9] Day broke, and the
camp was seen to be deserted, and Cyrus, without more ado, led his
Persians within the entrenchments, where they found the stores that
the enemy had left: herds of sheep and goats and kine, and long rows
of waggons laden with good things. Cyaxares and his Medes followed,
and all arms took their breakfast in the camp. [10] But when the meal
was over, Cyrus summoned his brigadiers and said to them:

"Think what blessings we are flinging away now, spurning, as it were,
the very gifts of heaven! So at least it seems to me. The enemy have
given us the slip, as you see with your own eyes. Is it likely that
men who forsook the shelter of their own fortress will ever face us in
fair field on level ground? Will those who shrink from us before they
put our prowess to the test ever withstand us now when we have
overthrown and shattered them? They have lost their best and bravest,
and will the cowards dare to give us battle?"

[11] At that one of his officers cried, "Why not pursue at once, if
such triumphs are before us?"

And Cyrus answered, "Because we have not the horses. The stoutest of
our enemies, those whom we must seize or slay, are mounted on steeds
that could sweep past us like the wind. God helping us, we can put
them to flight, but we cannot overtake them."

[12] "Then," said they, "why not go and lay the matter before
Cyaxares?"

And he answered, "If so, you must all go with me, that Cyaxares may
see it is the wish of all."

So they all went together and spoke as they thought best. [13] Now
Cyaxares felt, no doubt, a certain jealousy that the Persians should
be the first to broach the matter, but he may also have felt that it
was really wiser to run no further risks for the present; he had,
moreover, abandoned himself to feasting and merrymaking, and he saw
that most of his Medes were in like case. Whatever the reason, this
was the answer he gave:

[14] "My good nephew, I have always heard and always seen that you
Persians of all men think it your duty never to be insatiate in the
pursuit of any pleasure; and I myself believe that the greater the joy
the more important is self-restraint. Now what greater joy could there
be than the good fortune which waits on us to-day? [15] When fortune
comes to us, if we guard her with discretion, we may live to grow old
in peace, but if we are insatiate, if we use and abuse our pleasures,
chasing first one and then another, we may well fear lest that fate be
ours which, the proverb tells us, falls on those mariners who cannot
forgo their voyages in the pursuit of wealth, and one day the deep sea
swallows them. Thus has many a warrior achieved one victory only to
clutch at another and lose the first. [16] If indeed, our enemies who
have fled were weaker than we, it might be safe enough to pursue them.
But now, bethink you, how small a portion of them we have fought and
conquered; the mass have had no part in the battle, and they, if we do
not force them to fight, will take themselves off through sheer
cowardice and sloth. As yet they know nothing of our powers or their
own, but if they learn that to fly is as dangerous as to hold their
ground, we run the risk of driving them to be brave in spite of
themselves. [17] You may be sure they are just as anxious to save
their wives and children as you can be to capture them. Take a lesson
from hunting: the wild sow when she is sighted will scamper away with
her young, though she be feeding with the herd; but if you attack her
little ones she will never fly, even if she is all alone; she will
turn on the hunters. [18] Yesterday the enemy shut themselves up in a
fort, and then handed themselves over to us to choose how many we
cared to fight. But if we meet them in open country, and they learn
how to divide their forces and take us in front and flank and rear, I
wonder how many pairs of eyes and hands each man of us would need!
Finally," he added, "I have no great wish myself to disturb my Medes
in their enjoyment, and drive them out to further dangers."

[19] Then Cyrus took him up: "Nay, I would not have you put pressure
on any man; only let those who are willing follow me, and perhaps we
shall come back with something for all of you to enjoy. The mass of
the enemy we should not think of pursuing; indeed, how could we
overtake them? But if we cut off any stragglers, we could clap hands
on them and bring them back to you. [20] Remember," he added, "when
you sent for us, we came a long way to do you service; is it not fair
that you should do us a kindness in return, and let us have something
to take back with us for ourselves, and not stand here agape at all
your treasures?"

[21] At that Cyaxares answered, "Ah, if any will follow you of their
own free will, I can but be most grateful."

"Send some one with me then," said Cyrus, "from these trusty men of
yours, to carry your commands."

"Take whomever you like," he answered, "and begone."

[22] Now, as it chanced, among the officers present was the Mede who
had claimed kinship with Cyrus long ago and won a kiss thereby. Cyrus
pointed to him and said, "That man will do for me." "He shall go with
you then," Cyaxares replied. And turning to the officer, "Tell your
fellows," he said, "that he who lists may follow Cyrus." [23] Thus
Cyrus chose his man and went forth. And when they were outside he
said, "To-day you can show me if you spoke truth long ago when you
told me that the sight of me was your joy."

"If you say that," said the Mede, "I will never leave you."

"And will you not do your best," added Cyrus, "to bring me others
too?" "By the gods in heaven," cried the Mede, "that I will, until you
say in your turn that to see me is your joy." Thereupon, with the
authority of Cyaxares to support him, the officer went to the Medes
and delivered with message with all diligence, adding that he for one
would never forsake Cyrus, the bravest, noblest, and best of men, and
a hero whose lineage was divine.

[C.2] While Cyrus was busied with these matters, by some strange
chance two ambassadors arrived from the Hyrcanians. These people are
neighbours of the Assyrians, and being few in number, they were held
in subjection. But they seemed then, as they seem now, to live on
horseback. Hence the Assyrians used them as the Lacedaemonians employ
the Skirites, for every toil and every danger, without sparing them.
In fact, at that very moment they had ordered them to furnish a rear-
guard of a thousand men and more, so as to bear the brunt of any rear
attack. [2] The Hyrcanians, as they were to be the hindmost, had put
their waggons and families in the rear, for, like most of the tribes
in Asia, they take their entire households with them on the march. [3]
But when they thought of the sorry treatment they got from the
Assyrians and when they saw the king fallen, the army worsted and a
prey to panic, the allies disheartened and ready to desert, they
judged it a fine moment to revolt themselves, if only the Medes and
Persians would make common cause with them. So they sent an embassy to
Cyrus, for after the late battle there was no name like his. [4] They
told him what good cause they had to hate the Assyrians, and how if he
was willing to attack them now, they themselves would be his allies
and show him the way. At the same time they gave a full account of the
enemy's doings, being eager to get Cyrus on the road. [5] "Do you
think," said Cyrus, "we should overtake the Assyrians before they
reach their fortresses? We look on it as a great misfortune," he
added, "that they ever slipped through our fingers and escaped." (This
he said, wishing to give his hearers as high an opinion as possible of
himself and his friends.) [6] "You should certainly catch them," they
answered, "and that to-morrow, ere the day is old, if you gird up your
loins: they move heavily because of their numbers and their train of
waggons, and to-day, since they did not sleep last night, they have
only gone a little way ahead, and are now encamped for the evening."

[7] "Can you give us any guarantee," said Cyrus, "that what you say is
true?"

"We will give you hostages," they said; "we will ride off at once and
bring them back this very night. Only do you on your side call the
gods to witness and give us the pledge of your own right hand, that we
may give our people the assurance we have received from you
ourselves."

[8] Thereupon Cyrus gave them his pledge that if they would make good
what they promised he would treat them as his true friends and
faithful followers, of no less account than the Persians and the
Medes. And to this day one may see Hyrcanians treated with trust and
holding office on an equal footing with Persians and Medes of high
distinction.

[9] Now Cyrus and his men took their supper and then while it was
still daylight he led his army out, having made the two Hyrcanians
wait so that they might go with them. The Persians, of course, were
with him to a man, and Tigranes was there, with his own contingent,
and the Median volunteers, who had joined for various reasons. [10]
Some had been friends of Cyrus in boyhood, others had hunted with him
and learnt to admire his character, others were grateful, feeling he
had lifted a load of fear from them, others were flushed with hope,
nothing doubting that great things were reserved for the man who had
proved so brave and so fortunate already. Others remembered the time
when he was brought up in Media, and were glad to return the
kindnesses that he had shown them; many could recall the favours the
boy had won for them from his grandfather through his sheer goodness
of heart; and many, now that they had seen the Hyrcanians and heard
say they were leading them to untold treasures, went out from simple
love of gain. [11] So they sallied forth, the entire body of the
Persians and all the Medes, except those who were quartered with
Cyaxares: these stayed behind, and their men with them. But all the
rest went out with radiant faces and eager hearts, not following him
from constraint, but offering willing service in their gratitude. [12]
So, as soon as they were well afield, Cyrus went to the Medes and
thanked them, praying that the gods in their mercy might guide them
all, and that he himself might have power given him to reward their
zeal. He ended by saying that the infantry would lead the van, while
they would follow with the cavalry, and whenever the column halted on
the march they were to send him gallopers to receive his orders. [13]
Then he bade the Hyrcanians lead the way, but they exclaimed, "What?
Are you not going to wait until we bring the hostages? Then you could
begin the march with pledges from us in return for yours."

But he answered, as the story says, "If I am not mistaken, we hold the
pledges now, in our own hearts and our own right hands. We believe
that if you are true to us we can do you service, and if you play us
false, you will not have us at your mercy; God willing, we shall hold
you at ours. Nevertheless," he added, "since you tell us your own folk
follow in the Assyrian rear, point them out to us as soon as you set
eyes upon them, that we may spare their lives."

[14] When the Hyrcanians heard this they led the way as he ordered,
marvelling at his strength of soul. Their own fear of the Assyrians,
the Lydians, and their allies, had altogether gone; their dread now
was lest Cyrus should regard themselves as mere dust in the balance,
and count it of no importance whether they stayed with him or not.

[15] As night closed in on their march, the legend runs that a strange
light shone out, far off in the sky, upon Cyrus and his host, filling
them with awe of the heavenly powers and courage to meet the foe.
Marching as they did, their loins girt and their pace swift, they
covered a long stretch of road in little time, and with the half light
of the morning they were close to the Hyrcanian rear-guard. [16] As
soon as the guides saw it, they told Cyrus that these were their own
men: they knew this, they added, from the number of their fires, and
the fact that they were in the rear. [17] Therefore Cyrus sent one of
the guides to them, bidding them come out at once, if they were
friendly, with their right hands raised. And he sent one of his own
men also to say, "According as you make your approach, so shall we
Persians comport ourselves."

Thus one of the two messengers stayed with Cyrus while the other rode
up to his fellows. [18] Cyrus halted his army to watch what the tribe
would do, and Tigranes and the Median officers rode along the ranks to
ask for orders. Cyrus explained that the troops nearest to them were
the Hyrcanians, and that one of the ambassadors had gone, and a
Persian with him, to bid them come out at once, if they were friendly,
with their right hands raised. "If they do so," he added, "you must
welcome them as they come, each of you at your post, and take them by
the hand and encourage them, but if they draw sword or try to escape,
you must make an example of them: not a man of them must be left."

Such were his orders. [19] However, as soon as the Hyrcanians heard
the message, they were overjoyed: springing to their steeds they
galloped up to Cyrus, holding out their right hands as he had bidden.
Then the Medes and Persians gave them the right hand of fellowship in
return, and bade them be of courage. [20] And Cyrus spoke:

"Sons of the Hyrcanians, we have shown our trust in you already, and
you must trust us in return. And now tell me, how far from here do the
Assyrian headquarters lie, and their main body?" "About four miles
hence," they answered.

[21] "Forward then, my men," said Cyrus, "Persians, Medes, and
Hyrcanians. I have learnt already, you see, to call you friends and
comrades. All of you must remember that the moment has come when, if
hand falters or heart fails, we meet with utter disaster: our enemies
know why we are here. But if we summon our strength and charge home,
you shall see them caught like a pack of runaway slaves, some on their
knees, others in full flight, and the rest unable to do even so much
for themselves. They are beaten already, and they will see their
conquerors fall on them before they dream of an approach, before their
ranks are formed or their preparations made, and the sight will
paralyse them. [22] If we wish to sleep and eat and live in peace and
happiness from this time forth, let us not give them leisure to take
counsel or arrange defence, or so much as see that we are men, and not
a storm of shields and battle-axes and flashing swords, sweeping on
them in one rain of blows. [23] You Hyrcanians must go in front of us
as a screen, that we may lie behind you as long as may be. And as soon
as I close with them, you must give me, each of you, a squadron of
horse, to use in case of need while I am waiting at the camp. [24] I
would advise the older men among you and the officers, to ride in
close order, so that your ranks should not be broken, if you come
across a compact body of the foe; let the younger men give chase, and
do the killing; our safest plan to-day is to leave as few of the enemy
alive as possible. [25] And if we conquer," he added, "we must beware
of what has overset the fortune of many a conqueror ere now, I mean
the lust for plunder. The man who plunders is no longer a man, he is a
machine for porterage, and all who list may treat him as a slave. [26]
One thing we must bear in mind: nothing can bring such gain as
victory; at one clutch the victor seizes all, men and women, and
wealth, and territory. Therefore make it your one object to secure the
victory; if he is conquered, the greatest plunderer is caught. One
more word--remember, even in the heat of pursuit to rejoin me while it
is still daylight, for when darkness has fallen we will not admit a
soul within the lines."

[27] With these words he sent them off to their appointed stations,
bidding them repeat his instructions on the way to their own
lieutenants, who were posted in front to receive the orders, and make
each of them pass down the word to his own file of ten. Thereupon the
advance began, the Hyrcanians leading off, Cyrus holding the centre
himself, marching with his Persians, and the cavalry in the usual way,
drawn up on either flank.

[28] As the day broke the enemy saw them for the first time: some
simply stared at what was happening, others began to realise the
truth, calling and shouting to each other, unfastening their horses,
getting their goods together, tearing what they needed off the beasts
of burden, and others arming themselves, harnessing their steeds,
leaping to horse, others helping the women into their carriages, or
seizing their valuables, some caught in the act of burying them,
others, and by far the greatest number, in sheer headlong flight. Many
and divers were their shifts, as one may well conceive, save only that
not one man stood at bay: they perished without a blow. [29] Now
Croesus, king of Lydia, seeing that it was summer-time, had sent his
women on during the night, so that they might travel more pleasantly
in the cool, and he himself had followed with his cavalry to escort
them. [30] The Lord of Hellespontine Phrygia, it is said, had done the
same. And these two, when they heard what was happening from the
fugitives who overtook them, fled for their lives with the rest. [31]
But it was otherwise with the kings of Cappadocia and Arabia; they had
not gone far, and they stood their ground, but they had not even time
to put on their corslets, and were cut down by the Hyrcanians. Indeed,
the mass of those who fell were Assyrians and Arabians, for, being in
their own country, they had taken no precautions on the march. [32]
The victorious Medes and the Hyrcanians had their hands full with the
chase, and meanwhile Cyrus made the cavalry who were left with him
ride all round the camp and cut down any man who left it with weapons
in his hands. Then he sent a herald to those who remained, bidding the
horsemen and targeteers and archers come out on foot, with their
weapons tied in bundles, and deliver them up to him, leaving their
horses in their stalls: he who disobeyed should lose his head, and a
cordon of Persian troops stood round with their swords drawn. [33] At
that the weapons were brought at once, and flung down, and Cyrus had
the whole pile burnt.

[34] Meanwhile he did not forget that his own troops had come without
food or drink, that nothing could be done without provisions, and that
to obtain these in the quickest way, it was necessary on every
campaign to have some one to see that quarters were prepared and
supplies ready for the men on their return. [35] It occurred to him it
was more than likely that such officers, of all others, would be left
behind in the Assyrian camp, because they would have been delayed by
the packing.

Accordingly, he sent out a proclamation that all the stewards should
present themselves before him, and if there was no such officer left,
the oldest man in every tent must take his place; any one failing to
obey would suffer the severest penalties. The stewards, following the
example of their masters, obeyed at once. And when they came before
him he ordered those who had more than two months' rations in their
quarters to sit down on the ground, and then those who had provisions
for one month. [36] Thereupon very few were left standing. [37] Having
thus got the information he needed, he spoke to them as follows:

"Gentlemen, if any of you dislike hard blows and desire gentle
treatment at our hands, make it your business to provide twice as much
meat and drink in every tent as you have been wont to do, with all
things that are needed for a fine repast. The victors, whoever they
are, will be here anon, and will expect an overflowing board. You may
rest assured it will not be against your interests to give them a
welcome they can approve."

[38] At that the stewards went off at once and set to work with all
zeal to carry out their instructions. Then Cyrus summoned his own
officers and said to them:

"My friends, it is clear that we have it in our power, now that our
allies' backs are turned, to help ourselves to breakfast, and take our
choice of the most delicate dishes and the rarest wines. But I
scarcely think this would do us so much good as to show that we study
the interest of our friends: the best of cheer will not give us half
the strength we could draw from the zeal of loyal allies whose
gratitude we had won. [39] If we forget those who are toiling for us
now, pursuing our foes, slaying them, and fighting wherever they
resist, if they see that we sit down to enjoy ourselves and devour our
meal before we know how it goes with them, I fear we shall cut a sorry
figure in their eyes, and our strength will turn to weakness through
lack of friends. The true banquet for us is to study the wants of
those who have run the risk and done the work, to see that they have
all they need when they come home, a banquet that will give us richer
delight than any gorging of the belly. [40] And remember, that even if
the thought of them were not enough to shame us from it, in no case is
this a moment for gluttony and drunkenness: the thing we set our minds
to do is not yet done: everything is full of danger still, and calls
for carefulness. We have enemies in this camp ten times more numerous
than ourselves, and they are all at large: we need both to guard
against them and to guard them, so that we may have servants to
furnish us with supplies. Our cavalry are not yet back, and we must
ask ourselves where they are and whether they mean to stay with us
when they return. [41] Therefore, gentlemen, I would say, for the
present let us above all be careful to avoid the food and drink that
leads to slumber and stupefaction. [42] And there is another matter:
this camp contains vast treasures, and I am well aware we have it in
our power to pick and choose as much as we like for ourselves out of
what belongs by right to all who helped in its capture. But it does
not seem to me that grasping will be so lucrative as proving ourselves
just toward our allies, and so binding them closer. [43] I go further:
I say that we should leave the distribution of the spoil to the Medes,
the Hyrcanians, and Tigranes, and count it gain if they allot us the
smaller share, for then they will be all the more willing to stay with
us. [44] Selfishness now could only secure us riches for the moment,
while to let these vanities go in order to obtain the very fount of
wealth, that, I take it, will ensure for us and all whom we call ours
a far more enduring gain. [45] Was it not," he continued, "for this
very reason that we trained ourselves at home to master the belly and
its appetites, so that, if ever the need arose, we might turn our
education to account? And where, I ask, shall we find a nobler
opportunity than this, to show what we have learnt?"

[46] Such were his words and Hystaspas the Persian rose to support
him, saying:

"Truly, Cyrus, it would be a monstrous thing if we could go fasting
when we hunt, and keep from food so often and so long merely to lay
some poor beast low, worth next to nothing, maybe, and yet, when a
world of wealth is our quarry, let ourselves be baulked by one of
those temptations which flee before the noble and rule the bad. Such
conduct, methinks, would be little worthy of our race."

[47] So Hystaspas spoke, and the rest approved him, one and all. Then
Cyrus said:

"Come now, since we are all of one mind, each of you give me five of
the trustiest fellows in his company, and let them go the rounds, and
see how the supplies are furnished; let them praise the active
servants, and where they see neglect, chastise them more severely than
their own masters could."

Thus they dealt with these matters.

[C.3] But it was not long before some of the Medes returned: one set
had overtaken the waggons that had gone ahead, seized them and turned
them back, and were now driving them to the camp, laden with all that
an army could require, and others had captured the covered carriages
in which the women rode, the wives of the Assyrian grandees or their
concubines, whom they had taken with them because of their beauty. [2]
Indeed, to this day the tribes of Asia never go on a campaign without
their most precious property: they say they can fight better in the
presence of their beloved, feeling they must defend their treasures,
heart and soul. It may be so, but it may also be that the desire for
pleasure is the cause.

[3] And when Cyrus saw the feats of arms that the Medes and the
Hyrcanians had performed, he came near reproaching himself and those
that were with him; the others, he felt, had risen with the time, had
shown their strength and won their prizes, while he and his had stayed
behind like sluggards. Indeed it was a sight to watch the victors
riding home, driving their spoil before them, pointing it out with
some display to Cyrus, and then dashing off again at once in search of
more, according to the instructions they had received.

But though he ate out his heart with envy Cyrus was careful to set all
their booty apart; and then he summoned his own officers again, and
standing where they could all hear what he had to propose, he spoke as
follows:

[4] "My friends, you would all agree, I take it, that if the spoils
displayed to us now were our own to keep, wealth would be showered on
every Persian in the land, and we ourselves, no doubt, through whom it
was won, would receive the most. But what I do not see is how we are
to get possession of such prizes unless we have cavalry of our own.
[5] Consider the facts," he continued, "we Persians have weapons with
which, we hope, we can rout the enemy at close quarters: but when we
do rout them, what sort of horsemen or archers or light-armed troops
could ever be caught and killed, if we can only pursue them on foot?
Why should they ever be afraid to dash up and harry us, when they know
full well that they run no greater risk at our hands than if we were
stumps in their orchards? [6] And if this be so, it is plain that the
cavalry now with us consider every gain to be as much theirs as ours,
and possibly even more, God wot! [7] At present things must be so:
there is no help for it. But suppose we were to provide ourselves with
as good a force as our friends, it must be pretty evident to all of
us, I think, that we could then deal with the enemy by ourselves
precisely as we do now with their help, and then perhaps we should
find that they would carry their heads less high. It would be of less
importance to us whether they chose to stay or go, we should be
sufficient for ourselves without them. [8] So far then I expect that
no one will disagree: if we could get a body of Persian cavalry it
would make all the difference to us; but no doubt you feel the
question is, how are we to get it? Well, let us consider first,
suppose we decide to raise the force, exactly what we have to start
with and what we need. [9] We certainly have hundreds of horses now
captured in this camp, with their bridles and all their gear. Besides
these, we have all the accoutrements for a mounted force, breast-
plates to protect the trunk, and light spears to be flung or wielded
at close quarters. What else do we need? It is plain we need men. [10]
But that is just what we have already at our own command. For nothing
is so much ours as our own selves. Only, some will say, we have not
the necessary skill. No, of course not, and none of those who have it
now had it either before they learnt to get it. Ah, you object, but
they learnt when they were boys. [11] Maybe; but are boys more capable
of learning what they are taught then grown men? Which are the better
at heavy physical tasks, boys or men? [12] Besides, we, of all pupils,
have advantages that neither boys nor other men possess: we have not
to be taught the use of the bow as boys have, we are skilled in that
already; nor yet the use of the javelin, we are versed in that; our
time has not been taken up like other men's with toiling on the land
or labouring at some craft or managing household matters; we have not
only had leisure for war, it has been our life. [13] Moreover, one
cannot say of riding as of so many warlike exercises that it is useful
but disagreeable. To ride a-horseback is surely pleasanter than to
trudge a-foot? And as for speed--how pleasant to join a friend betimes
whenever you wish, or come up with your quarry be it man or beast! And
then, the ease and satisfaction of it! Whatever weapon the rider
carries his horse must help to bear the load: 'wear arms' and 'bear
arms,'--they are the same thing on horseback. [14] But now, to meet
the worst we can apprehend: suppose, before we are adepts, we are
called upon to run some risk, and then find that we are neither
infantry nor thoroughgoing cavalry? This may be a danger, but we can
guard against it. We have it always in our power to turn into infantry
again at a moment's notice. I do not propose that by learning to ride
we should unlearn the arts of men on foot."

[15] Thus spoke Cyrus, and Chrysantas rose to support him, saying:

"For my part I cannot say I so much desire to be a horseman as flatter
myself that once I can ride I shall be a sort of flying man. [16] At
present when I race I am quiet content if, with a fair start, I can
beat one of my rivals by the head, or when I sight my game I am happy
if, by laying legs to the ground, I can get close enough to let fly
javelin or arrow before he is clean out of range. But when once I am a
horseman I shall be able to overhaul my man as far as I can see him,
or come up with the beasts I chase and knock them over myself or else
spear them as though they stood stock still, for when hunter and
hunted are both of them racing, if they are only side by side, it is
as good as though neither of them moved. [17] And the creature I have
always envied," he continued, "the centaur--if only he had the
intelligence and forethought of a man, the adroit skill and the
cunning hand, with the swiftness and strength of a horse, so as to
overtake all that fled before him, and overthrow all that resisted--
why, all these powers I shall collect and gather in my own person when
once I am a rider. [18] Forethought I intend to keep with my human
wits, my hands can wield my weapons, and my horse's legs will follow
up the foe, and my horse's rush overthrow him. Only I shall not be
tied and fettered to my steed, flesh of his flesh, and blood of his
blood, like the old centaur. [19] And that I count a great improvement
on the breed, far better than being united to the animal, body and
soul. The old centaur, I imagine, must have been for ever in
difficulties; as a horse, he could not use the wonderful inventions of
man, and as a man, he could not enjoy the proper pleasures of a horse.
[20] But I, if I learn to ride, once set me astride my horse, and I
will do all that the centaur can, and yet, when I dismount, I can
dress myself as a human being, and dine, and sleep in my bed, like the
rest of my kind: in short, I shall be a jointed centaur that can be
taken to pieces and put together again. [21] And I shall gain another
point or so over the original beast: he, we know, had only two eyes to
see with and two ears to hear with, but I shall watch with four eyes
and with four ears I shall listen. You know, they tell us a horse can
often see quicker than any man, and hear a sound before his master,
and give him warning in some way. Have the goodness, therefore," he
added, "to write my name down among those who want to ride."

[22] "And ours too," they all cried, "ours too, in heaven's name!"

Then Cyrus spoke: "Gentlemen, since we are all so well agreed, suppose
we make it a rule that every one who receives a horse from me shall be
considered to disgrace himself if he is seen trudging afoot, be his
journey long or short?"

[23] Thus Cyrus put the question, and one and all assented; and hence
it is that even to this day the custom is retained, and no Persian of
the gentle class would willingly be seen anywhere on foot.

[C.4] In this debate their time was spent, and when it was past midday
the Median cavalry and the Hyrcanians came galloping home, bringing in
men and horses from the enemy, for they had spared all who surrendered
their arms. [2] As they rode up the first inquiry of Cyrus was whether
all of them were safe, and when they answered yes, he asked what they
had achieved. And they told their exploits in detail, and how bravely
they had borne themselves, magnifying it all. [3] Cyrus heard their
story through with a pleasant smile, and praised them for their work.
"I can see for myself," he said, "that you have done gallant deeds.
You seem to have grown taller and fairer and more terrible to look on
than when we saw you last."

[4] Then he made them tell him how far they had gone, and whether they
had found the country inhabited. They said they had ridden a long way,
and that the whole country was inhabited, and full of sheep and goats
and cattle and horses, and rich in corn and every good thing.

[5] "Then there are two matters," he said, "to which we must attend;
first we must become masters of those who own all this, and next we
must ensure that they do not run away. A well-populated country is a
rich possession, but a deserted land will soon become a desert. [6]
You have put the defenders to the sword, I know, and rightly--for that
is the only safe road to victory; but you have brought in as prisoners
those who laid down their arms. Now if we let these men go, I maintain
we should do the very best thing for ourselves. [7] We gain two
points; first, we need neither be on our guard against them nor mount
guard over them nor find them victuals (and we do not propose to
starve them, I presume), and in the next place, their release means
more prisoners to-morrow. [8] For if we dominate the country all the
inhabitants are ours, and if they see that these men are still alive
and at large they will be more disposed to stay where they are, and
prefer obedience to battle. That is my own view, but if any one sees a
better course, let him point it out."

[9] However, all his hearers approved the plan proposed. Thus it came
to pass that Cyrus summoned the prisoners and said to them:

[10] "Gentlemen, you owe it to your own obedience this day that your
lives are safe; and for the future if you continue in this conduct, no
evil whatsoever shall befall you; true, you will not have the same
ruler as before, but you will dwell in the same houses, you will
cultivate the same land, you will live with your wives and govern your
children as you do now. Moreover you will not have us to fight with,
nor any one else. [11] On the contrary, if any wrong is done you, it
is we who will fight on your behalf. And to prevent any one from
ordering you to take the field, you will bring your arms to us and
hand them over. Those who do this can count on peace and the faithful
fulfilment of our promises; those who will not, must expect war, and
that at once. [12] Further, if any man of you comes to us and shows a
friendly spirit, giving us information and helping us in any way, we
will treat him not as a servant, but as a friend and benefactor.
This," he added, "we wish you to understand yourselves and make known
among your fellows. [13] And if it should appear that you yourselves
are willing to comply but others hinder you, lead us against them, and
you shall be their masters, not they yours."

Such were his words; and they made obeisance and promised to do as he
bade.

[C.5] And when they were gone, Cyrus turned to the Medes and the men
of Armenia, and said, "It is high time, gentlemen, that we should
dine, one and all of us; food and drink are prepared for you, the best
we had skill to find. Send us, if you will, the half of the bread that
has been baked; there is ample, I know, for both of us; but do not
send any relish with it, nor any drink, we have quite enough at hand.
[2] And do you," he added, turning to the Hyrcanians, "conduct our
friends to their quarters, the officers to the largest tents--you know
where they are--and the rest where you think best. For yourselves, you
may dine where you like; your quarters are intact, and you will find
everything there prepared for you exactly as it is for the others. [3]
All of you alike must understand that during the night we Persians
will guard the camp outside, but you must keep an eye over what goes
on within; and see that your arms are ready to hand; our messmates are
not our friends as yet."

[4] So the Medes and Tigranes with his men washed away the stains of
battle, and put on the apparel that was laid out for them, and fell to
dinner, and the horses had their provender too. They sent half the
bread to the Persians but no relish with it and no wine, thinking that
Cyrus and his men possessed a store, because he had said they had
enough and to spare. But Cyrus meant the relish of hunger, and the
draught from the running river. [5] Thus he regaled his Persians, and
when the darkness fell he sent them out by fives and tens and ordered
them to lie in ambush around the camp, so as to form a double guard,
against attack from without, and absconders from within; any one
attempting to make off with treasures would be caught in the act. And
so it befell; for many tried to escape, and all of them were seized.
[6] As for the treasures, Cyrus allowed the captors to keep them, but
he had the absconders beheaded out of hand, so that for the future a
thief by night was hardly to be found. Thus the Persians passed their
time. [7] But the Medes drank and feasted and made music and took
their fill of good cheer and all delights; there was plenty to serve
their purpose, and work enough for those who did not sleep.

[8] Cyaxares, the king of the Medes, on the very night when Cyrus set
forth, drank himself drunk in company with the officers in his own
quarters to celebrate their good fortune. Hearing uproar all about
him, he thought that the rest of the Medes must have stayed behind in
the camp, except perhaps a few, but the fact was that their domestics,
finding the masters gone, had fallen to drinking in fine style and
were making a din to their hearts' content, the more so that they had
procured wine and dainties from the Assyrian camp. [9] But when it was
broad day and no one knocked at the palace gate except the guests of
last night's revel, and when Cyaxares heard that the camp was deserted
--the Medes gone, the cavalry gone--and when he went out and saw for
himself that it was so, then he fumed with indignation against Cyrus
and his own men, to think that they had gone off and left him in the
lurch. It is said that without more ado, savage and mad with anger as
he was, he ordered one of his staff to take his troopers and ride at
once to Cyrus and his men, and there deliver this message:

[10] "I should never have dreamed that Cyrus could have acted towards
me with such scant respect, or, if he could have thought of it, that
the Medes could have borne to desert me in this way. And now, whether
Cyrus will or no, I command the Medes to present themselves before me
without delay."

[11] Such was the message. But he who was to take it said, "And how
shall I find them, my lord?"

"Why," said Cyaxares, "as Cyrus and his men found those they went to
seek."

"I only asked," continued the messenger, "because I was told that some
Hyrcanians who had revolted from the enemy came here, and went off
with him to act as guides."

[12] When Cyaxares heard that, he was the more enraged to think that
Cyrus had never told him, and the more urgent to have his Medes
removed from him at once, and he summoned them home under fiercer
threats than ever; threatening the officer as well if he failed to
deliver the message in full force.

[13] So the emissary set off with his troopers, about one hundred
strong, fervently regretting that he had not gone with Cyrus himself.
On the way they took a turning which led them wrong, and they did not
reach the Persians until they had chanced upon some of the Assyrians
in retreat and forced them to be their guides, and so at last arrived,
sighting the watch-fires about midnight. [14] But though they had got
to the camp, the pickets, acting on the orders of Cyrus, would not let
them in till dawn. With the first faint gleam of morning Cyrus
summoned the Persian Priests, who are called Magians, and bade them
choose the offerings due to the gods for the blessings they had
vouchsafed. [15] And while they were about this, Cyrus called the
Peers together and said to them:

"Gentlemen, God has put before us many blessings, but at present we
Persians are but a scant company to keep them. If we fail to guard
what we have toiled for, it will soon fall back into other hands, and
if we leave some of our number to watch our gains, it will soon be
seen that we have no strength in us. [16] I propose therefore that one
of you should go home to Persia without loss of time, and explain what
I need and bid them despatch an army forthwith, if they desire Persia
to win the empire of Asia and the fruits thereof. [17] Do you," said
he, turning to one of the Peers, "do you, who are the eldest, go and
repeat these words, and tell them that it shall be my care to provide
for the soldiers they send me as soon as they are here. And as to what
we have won--you have seen it yourself--keep nothing back, and ask my
father how much I ought to send home for an offering to the gods, if I
wish to act in honour and according to the law, and ask the
magistrates how much is due to the commonwealth. And let them send
commissioners to watch all that we do and answer all that we ask. So,
sir," he ended, "you will get your baggage together, and take your
company with you as an escort. Fare you well."

[18] With that message he turned to the Medes and at the same moment
the messenger from Cyaxares presented himself, and in the midst of the
whole assembly announced the anger of the king against Cyrus, and his
threats against the Medes, and so bade the latter return home at once,
even if Cyrus wished them to stay. [19] The Medes listened, but were
silent; for they were sore bested; they could hardly disobey the
summons, and yet they were afraid to go back after his threats, being
all too well acquainted with the savage temper of their lord. [20] But
Cyrus spoke:

"Herald," said he, "and sons of the Medes, I am not surprised that
Cyaxares, who saw the host of the enemy so lately, and knows so little
of what we have done now, should tremble for us and for himself. But
when he learns how many have fallen, and that all have been dispersed,
his fears will vanish, and he will recognise that he is not deserted
on this day of all days when his friends are destroying his foes. [21]
Can we deserve blame for doing him a service? And that not even
without his own consent? I am acting as I am, only after having gained
his leave to take you out; it is not as though you had come to me in
your own eagerness, and begged me to let you go, and so were here now;
he himself ordered you out, those of you who did not find it a
burthen. Therefore, I feel sure, his anger will melt in the sunshine
of success, and, when his fears are gone, it will vanish too. [22] For
the moment then," he added, turning to the messenger, "you must
recruit yourself; you have had a heavy task; and for ourselves," said
he, turning to the Persians, "since we are waiting for an enemy who
will either offer us battle or render us submission, we must draw up
in our finest style; the spectacle, perhaps, will bring us more than
we could dare to hope. And do you," he said, taking the Hyrcanian
chieftain aside, "after you have told your officers to arm their men,
come back and wait with me a moment."

[23] So the Hyrcanian went and returned. Then Cyrus said to him, "Son
of Hyrcania, it gives me pleasure to see that you show not only
friendliness, but sagacity. It is clear that our interests are the
same; the Assyrians are my foes as well as yours, only they hate you
now even more bitterly than they hate me. [24] We must consult
together and see that not one of our present allies turns his back on
us, and we must do what we can to acquire more. You heard the Mede
summon the cavalry to return, and if they go, we shall be left with
nothing but infantry. [25] This is what we must do, you and I; we must
make this messenger, who is sent to recall them, desirous to stay here
himself. You must find him quarters where he will have a merry time
and everything heart can wish, and I will offer him work which he will
like far better than going back. And do you talk to him yourself, and
dilate on all the wonders we expect for our friends if things go well.
And when you have done this, come back again and tell me."

[26] So the chieftain took the Mede away to his own quarters, and
meanwhile the messenger from Persia presented himself equipped for the
journey, and Cyrus bade him tell the Persians all that had happened,
as it has been set out in this story, and then he gave him a letter to
Cyaxares. "I would like to read you the very words," he added, "so
that what you say yourself may agree with it, in case you have
questions asked you."

[27] The letter ran as follows:--"Cyrus to Cyaxares, greeting. We do
not admit that we have deserted you; for no one is deserted when he is
being made the master of his enemies. Nor do we consider that we put
you in jeopardy by our departure; on the contrary, the greater the
distance between us the greater the security we claim to have won for
you. [28] It is not the friend at a man's elbow who serves him and
puts him out of danger, but he who drives his enemies farthest and
furthest away. [29] And I pray you to remember what I have done for
you, and you for me, before you blame me. I brought you allies, not
limiting myself to those you asked for, but pressing in every man that
I could find; you allowed me while we were on friendly soil only to
take those whom I could persuade to follow me, and now that I am in
hostile territory you insist that they must all return; you do not
leave it to their own choice. [30] Yesterday I felt that I owed both
you and them a debt of gratitude, but to-day you drive me to forget
your share, you make me wish to repay those, and those only, who
followed me. [31] Not that I could bring myself to return you like for
like; even now I am sending to Persia for more troops, and instructing
all the men who come that, if you need them before we return, they
must hold themselves at your service absolutely, to act not as they
wish, but as you may care to use them. [32] In conclusion, I would
advise you, though I am younger than yourself, not to take back with
one hand what you give with the other, or else you will win hatred
instead of gratitude; nor to use threats if you wish men to come to
you speedily; nor to speak of being deserted when you threaten an
army, unless you would teach them to despise you. [33] For ourselves,
we will do our best to rejoin you as soon as we have concluded certain
matters which we believe will prove a common blessing to yourself and
us. Farewell."

[34] "Deliver this," said Cyrus, "to Cyaxares, and whatever questions
he puts to you, answer in accordance with it. My injunctions to you
about the Persians agree exactly with what is written here." With that
he gave him the letter and sent him off, bidding him remember that
speed was of importance.

[35] Then he turned to review his troops, who were already fully
armed, Medes, Hyrcanians, the men Tigranes had brought, and the whole
body of the Persians. And already some of the neighbouring folk were
coming up, to bring in their horses or hand over their arms. [36] The
javelins were then piled in a heap as before and burnt at his command,
after his troops had taken what they needed for themselves, but he
bade the owners stay with their horses until they received fresh
orders. This done, Cyrus called together the officers of the
Hyrcanians and of the cavalry, and spoke as follows:

[37] "My friends and allies, you must not be surprised that I summon
you so often. Our circumstances are so novel that much still needs
adjustment, and we must expect difficulty until everything has found
its place. [38] At present we have a mass of spoil, and prisoners set
to guard it. But we do not ourselves know what belongs to each of us,
nor could the guards say who the owners are: and thus it is impossible
for them to be exact in their duties, since scarcely any of them know
what these duties may be. [39] To amend this, you must divide the
spoil. There will be no difficulty where a man has won a tent that is
fully supplied with meat and drink, and servants to boot, bedding,
apparel, and everything to make it a comfortable home; he has only to
understand that this is now his private property, and he must look
after it himself. But where the quarters are not furnished so well,
there you must make it your business to supply what is lacking. [40]
There will be more than enough for this; of that I am sure; the enemy
had a stock of everything quite out of proportion to our scanty
numbers. Moreover, certain treasurers have come to me, men who were in
the service of the king of Assyria and other potentates, and according
to what they tell me, they have a supply of gold coin, the produce of
certain tributes they can name. [41] You will send out a proclamation
that this deposit must be delivered up to you in your quarters; you
must terrify those who fail to execute the order, and then you must
distribute the money; the mounted men should have two shares apiece
for the foot-soldier's one; and you should keep the surplus, so that
in case of need you may have wherewith to make your purchases. [42]
With regard to the camp-market, proclamation must be made at once,
forbidding any injustice; the hucksters must be allowed to sell the
goods they have brought, and when these are disposed of they may bring
more, so that the camp may be duly supplied."

[43] So the proclamations were issued forthwith. But the Medes and the
Hyrcanians asked Cyrus:

"How are we to distribute the spoil alone, without your men and
yourself?"

[44] But Cyrus met question by question: "Do you really think,
gentlemen, that we must all preside over every detail, each and all of
us together? Can I never act for you, and you for me? I could scarcely
conceive a surer way of creating trouble, or of reducing results.
See," said he, "I will take a case in point. [45] We Persians guarded
this booty for you, and you believe that we guarded it well: now it is
for you to distribute it, and we will trust you to be fair. [46] And
there is another benefit that I should be glad to obtain for us all.
You see what a number of horses we have got already, and more are
being brought in. If they are left riderless we shall get no profit
out of them; we shall only have the burden of looking after them. But
if we set riders on them, we shall be quit of the trouble and add to
our strength. [47] Now if you have other men in view, men whom you
would choose before us to share the brunt of danger with you, by all
means give these horses to them. But if you would rather have us fight
at your side than any others, bestow them upon us. [48] To-day when
you dashed ahead to meet danger all alone, great was our fear lest you
might come to harm, and bitter our shame to think that where you were
we were not. But if once we have horses, we can follow at your heels.
[49] And if it is clear that we do more good so mounted, shoulder to
shoulder with yourselves, we shall not fail in zeal; or if it appears
better to support you on foot, why, to dismount is but the work of a
moment, and you will have your infantry marching by your side at once,
and we will find men to hold our horses for us."

[50] To which they answered:

"In truth, Cyrus, we have not men for these horses ourselves, and even
if we had them, we should not do anything against your wish. Take
them, we beg you, and use them as you think best."

[51] "I will," said he, "and gladly, and may good fortune bless us
all, you in your division of the spoil and us in our horsemanship. In
the first place," he added, "you will set apart for the gods whatever
our priests prescribe, and after that you must select for Cyaxares
what you think will please him most."

[52] At that they laughed, and said they must choose him a bevy of
fair women. "So let it be," said Cyrus, "fair women, and anything else
you please. And when you have chosen his share, the Hyrcanians must
see to it that our friends among the Medes who followed us of their
own free will shall have no cause to find fault with their own
portion. [53] And the Medes on their side must show honour to the
first allies we have won, and make them feel their decision was wise
when they chose us for their friends. And be sure to give a share of
everything to the messenger who came from Cyaxares and to his retinue;
persuade him to stay on with us, say that I would like it, and that he
could tell Cyaxares all the better how matters stood. [54] As for my
Persians," he added, "we shall be quite content with what is left
over, after you are all provided for; we are not used to luxury, we
were brought up in a very simple fashion, and I think you would laugh
at us if you saw us tricked out in grand attire, just as I am sure you
will when you see us seated on our horses, or, rather, rolling off
them."

[55] So they dispersed to make the distribution, in great mirth over
the thought of the riding; and then Cyrus called his own officers and
bade them take the horses and their gear, and the grooms with them,
number them all, and then distribute them by lot in equal shares for
each division. [56] Finally he sent out another proclamation, saying
that if there was any slave among the Syrians, Assyrians, or Arabians
who was a Mede, a Persian, a Bactrian, a Carian, a Cilician, or a
Hellene, or a member of any other nation, and who had been forcibly
enrolled, he was to come forward and declare himself. [57] And when
they heard the herald, many came forward gladly, and out of their
number Cyrus selected the strongest and fairest, and told them they
were now free, and would be required to bear arms, with which he would
furnish them, and as to necessaries, he would see himself that they
were not stinted. [58] With that he brought them to the officers and
had them enrolled forthwith, saying they were to be armed with shields
and light swords, so as to follow the troopers, and were to receive
supplies exactly as if they were his own Persians. The Persian
officers themselves, wearing corslets and carrying lances, were for
the future to appear on horseback, he himself setting the example, and
each one was to appoint another of the Peers to lead the infantry for
him.

[C.6] While they were concerned with these matters, an old Assyrian
prince, Gobryas by name, presented himself before Cyrus, mounted on
horseback and with a mounted retinue behind him, all of them armed as
cavalry. The Persian officers who were appointed to receive the
weapons bade them hand over their lances and have them burnt with the
rest, but Gobryas said he wished to see Cyrus first. At that the
adjutants led him in, but they made his escort stay where they were.
[2] When the old man came before Cyrus, he addressed him at once,
saying:

"My lord, I am an Assyrian by birth; I have a strong fortress in my
territory, and I rule over a wide domain; I have cavalry at my
command, two thousand three hundred of them, all of which I offered to
the king of Assyria; and if ever he had a friend, that friend was I.
But he has fallen at your hands, the gallant heart, and his son, who
is my bitterest foe, reigns in his stead. Therefore I have come to
you, a suppliant at your feet. I am ready to be your slave and your
ally, and I implore you to be my avenger. You yourself will be a son
to me, for I have no male children now. [3] He whom I had, my only
son, he was beautiful and brave, my lord, and loved me and honoured me
as a father rejoices to be loved. And this vile king--his father, my
old master, had sent for my son, meaning to give him his own daughter
in marriage; and I let my boy go, with high hopes and a proud heart,
thinking that when I saw him again the king's daughter would be his
bride. And the prince, who is now king, invited him to the chase, and
bade him do his best, for he thought himself far the finer horseman of
the two. So they hunted together, side by side, as though they were
friends, and suddenly a bear appeared, and the two of them gave chase,
and the king's son let fly his javelin, but alas! he missed his aim,
and then my son threw--oh, that he never had!--and laid the creature
low. [4] The prince was stung to the quick, though for the moment he
kept his rancour hidden. But, soon after that, they roused a lion, and
then he missed a second time--no unusual thing for him, I imagine--but
my son's spear went home, and he brought the beast down, and cried,
'See, I have shot but twice, and killed each time!' And at this the
monster could not contain his jealousy; he snatched a spear from one
of his followers and ran my son through the body, my only son, my
darling, and took his life. [5] And I, unhappy that I am, I, who
thought to welcome a bride-groom, carried home a corpse. I, who am
old, buried my boy with the first down on his chin, my brave boy, my
well-beloved. And his assassin acted as though it were an enemy that
he had done to death. He never showed one sign of remorse, he never
paid one tribute of honour to the dead, in atonement for his cruel
deed. Yet his own father pitied me, and showed that he could share the
burden of my grief. [6] Had he lived, my old master, I would never
have come to you to do him harm; many a kindness have I received from
him, and many a service have I done him. But now that his kingdom has
descended to my boy's murderer--I could never be loyal to that man,
and he, I know, could never regard me as a friend. He knows too well
how I feel towards him, and how, after my former splendour, I pass my
days in mourning, growing old in loneliness and grief. [7] If you can
receive me, if you can give me some hope of vengeance for my dear son,
I think I should grow young again, I should not feel ashamed to live,
and when I came to die I should not die in utter wretchedness."

[8] So he spoke, and Cyrus answered:

"Gobryas, if your heart be set towards us as you say, I receive you as
my suppliant, and I promise, God helping me, to avenge your son. But
tell me," he added, "if we do this for you, and if we suffer you to
keep your stronghold, your land, your arms, and the power which you
had, how will you serve us in return?"

[9] And the old man answered:

"My stronghold shall be yours, to live in as often as you come to me;
the tribute which I used to pay to Assyria shall be paid to you; and
whenever you march out to war, I will march at your side with the men
from my own land. Moreover, I have a daughter, a well-beloved maiden,
ripe for marriage; once I thought of bringing her up to be the bride
of the man who is now king; but she besought me herself, with tears,
not to give her to her brother's murderer, and I have no mind to
oppose her. And now I will put her in your hands, to deal with as I
shall deal with you."

[10] So it came to pass that Cyrus said, "On the faith that you have
spoken truly and with true intent, I take your hand and I give you
mine; let the gods be witness."

And when this was done, Cyrus bade the old man depart in peace,
without surrendering his arms, and then he asked him how far away he
lived, "Since," said he, "I am minded to visit you." And Gobryas
answered, "If you set off early to-morrow, the next day you may lodge
with us." [11] With that he took his own departure, leaving a guide
for Cyrus.

Then the Medes presented themselves; they had set apart for the gods
what the Persian Priests thought right, and had left it in their
hands, and they had chosen for Cyrus the finest of all the tents, and
a lady from Susa, of whom the story says that in all Asia there was
never a woman so fair as she, and two singing-girls with her, the most
skilful among the musicians. The second choice was for Cyaxares, and
for themselves they had taken their fill of all they could need on the
campaign, since there was abundance of everything. [12] The Hyrcanians
had all they wanted too, and they made the messenger from Cyaxares
share and share alike with them. The tents which were left over they
delivered to Cyrus for his Persians; and the coined money they said
should be divided as soon as it was all collected, and divided it was.


NOTES

C1.10. Two theories of hedonism: (1) Cyaxares' "Economise the greatest
joy when you have got it," and by contrast (2) Cyrus' roaming from joy
to joy.

C1.22. Xenophon the Artist: the "kinsman" of Cyrus again, and the
light by-play to enliven the severe history. The economic organising
genius of Cyrus is also brought out.

C2.25. No looting, an order of the Duke of Wellington, Napier,
Wolseley.

C2.32. Cf. modern times; humane orders, but strict.

C2.34. The question of commissariat. Would a modern force storm a camp
without taking rations? I dare say they would.

C2.37. Notice the tone he adopts to these slaves; no bullying, but
appealing to appetite and lower motives. This is doubtless
Xenophontine and Hellenic.

C2.38. Important as illustrating the stern Spartan self-denial of the
man and his followers. There is a hedonistic test, but the higher
hedonism prevails against the lower: ignoble and impolitic to sit here
feasting while they are fighting, and we don't even know how it fares
with them, our allies. The style rises and is at times Pauline. St.
Paul, of course, is moving on a higher spiritual plane, but still--

C2.45, fin. The Education of Cyrus, Cyropaedia, {Keroupaideia}; the
name justified.

C2.46. Hystaspas' simple response: important, with other passages, to
show how naturally it came to them (i.e. the Hellenes and Xenophon) to
give a spiritual application to their rules of bodily and mental
training. These things to them are an allegory. The goal is lofty, if
not so sublime as St. Paul's or Comte's, the Christians or Positivists
(there has been an alteration for the better in the spiritual plane,
and Socrates helped to bring it about, I believe), but /ceteris
paribus/, the words of St. Paul are the words of Hystaspas and
Xenophon. They for a corruptible crown, and we for an incorruptible--
and one might find a still happier parable!

C2.46. Fine sentiment, this /noblesse oblige/ (cf. the archangelic
dignity in Milton, /Paradise Lost/, I think).

C2.47. The aristocratic theory (cf. modern English "nigger" theory,
Anglo-Indian, etc.).

C3.3. Xenophon's dramatic skill. We are made to feel the touch of
something galling in the manner of these Median and Hyrcanian
troopers.

C3.4. A 'cute beginning rhetorically, because in the most graceful way
possible, and without egotism /versus/ Medes and Hyrcanians, it
postulates the Persian superiority, moral, as against the accidental
inferiority of the moment caused by want of cavalry and the dependence
on others which that involves. I suppose it's no reflection on Cyrus'
military acumen not to foreseen this need. It would have been
premature then, now it organically grows; and there's no great crisis
to pass through.

C3.11. I should have thought this was a dangerous argument; obviously
boys do learn better than men certain things.

C3.12. Short sharp snap of argumentative style.

C3.19. The antithetic balance and word-jingle, with an exquisite,
puristic, precise, and delicate lisp, as of one tasting the flavour of
his words throughout.

C3.23. I think one sees how Xenophon built up his ideal structure on a
basis of actual living facts. The actual diverts the creator of Cyrus
from the ideal at times, as here. It is a slight declension in the
character of Cyrus to lay down this law, "equestrian once, equestrian
always." Xenophon has to account for the actual Persian horror of
pedestrianism: Cyrus himself can dismount, and so can the Persian
nobles with Cyrus the Younger, but still the rule is "never be seen
walking;" and without the concluding paragraph the dramatic narrative
that precedes would seem a little bit unfinished and pointless: with
the explanation it floats, and we forgive "the archic man" his
partiality to equestrianism, as later on we have to forgive him his
Median get-up and artificiality generally, which again is contrary to
the Xenophontine and the ideal Spartan spirit.

C4. Xenophon has this theory of mankind: some are fit to rule, the
rest to be ruled. It is parallel to the Hellenic slavery theory. Some
moderns, e.g. Carlyle (Ruskin perhaps) inherit it, and in lieu of
Hellenic slavery we have a good many caste-distinction crotchets still
left.

C4.13, fin. The first salaam, ominous of the advent of imperialism;
the sun's rim visible, and a ray shot up to the zenith.

C5. Here the question forces itself in the midst of all this "ironic"
waiting on the part of the Persians in Spartan durance for a future
apotheosis of splendour and luxuriance,--what is the moral? "Hunger
now and thirst, for ye shall be filled"--is that it? Well, anyhow it's
parallel to the modern popular Christianity, reward-in-heaven theory,
only on a less high level, but exactly the same logicality.

C5.6. A point, this reward to the catcher, and this rigid /couvrefeu/
habit (cf. modern military law).

C5.8. A dramatic contrast, the Median Cyaxares who follows Pleasure,
and the Persian Cyrus who follows Valour, /vide/ Heracles' choice
[/Memorabilia/, II. i. 21]. This allegorising tendency is engrained in
Xenophon: it is his view of life; one of the best things he got from
Socrates, no doubt. Later ( 12) the "ironic" suicidal self-assertion
of Cyaxares is contrasted with the health-giving victorious self-
repression of Cyrus.

C5.9-10. Xenophon can depict character splendidly: this is the
crapulous {orge} of the somewhat "hybristic" nature, seeing how the
land lies, /siccis luminibus/, the day after the premature revel.
Theophrastus couldn't better have depicted the irascible man. These
earliest portraits of character are, according to Xenophon's genius,
all sketched in the concrete, as it were. The character is not
philosophised and then illustrated by concrete instances after the
manner of Theophrastus, but we see the man moving before us and are
made aware of his nature at once.

C5.17. {kalos ka nomimos}, "in all honour, and according to the law,"
almost a Xenophontine motto, and important in reference to the
"questionable" conduct on his part in exile--"questionable" from a
modern rather than an "antique" standard. [The chief reference is to
Xenophon's presence on the Spartan side at the battle of Coronea
against his native city of Athens. See /Sketch/, Works, Vol. I. pp.
cxxiii. ff.]

C5.20. The "archic man" does not recognise the littleness of soul of
the inferior nature, he winks at it, and so disarms at once and
triumphs over savagery, and this not through cunning and pride, but a
kind of godlike imperturbable sympathy, as of a fearless man with a
savage hound. Still there is a good dash of diplomacy.

C5.21, fin. Pretty sentence. Xenophon's words: some of these are
prettily-sounding words, some are rare and choice and exquisite, some
are charged with feeling, you can't touch them with your finger-tips
without feeling an "affective" thrill. That is in part the /goeteia/,
the witchery, of his style.

C5.30-31. A brilliant stroke of diplomacy worthy of the archic man.
This {arkinoia} of the Hellene is the necessary sharp shrewdness of a
brain, which, however "affectively" developed, is at bottom highly
organised intellectually. H. S.[*] has it, all 'cute people and
nations have it, the Americans, e.g.--every proposition must, however
else it presents itself, be apprehended in its logical bearings: the
result may be logically damaging to the supporter of it, but does not
necessarily banish an affective sympathetic attitude on the part of
the common-sense antagonist, who is not bound, in other words, to be a
sharp practitioner because he sees clearly. Affection is the inspirer,
intellect the up-and-doing agent of the soul. The Hellenes and all
'cute people put the agent to the fore in action, but if besides being
'cute they are affective, the operations of the agent will be confined
within prescribed limits.

[* "H. S." = Henry Sidgwick, the philosopher, author of /Methods of
Ethics/, etc., a life-long friend of Mr. Dakyns.]

C5.32. This is almost pummelling, but it's fair: it's rather, "See, I
have you now in Chancery, I could pummel if I would."

C5.37. These constant masters' meetings!

C5.38 ff. The mind of Xenophon: guiding principles, rule of Health,
rule of Forethought. Religious trust in the divine, and for things
beyond man's control; orderly masterly working out of problems within
his power. Economic, diplomatic, anchinoetic, archic manhood. Moral
theory, higher hedonism.

C5.45. The archic man trusts human nature: this appeal to their good
faith is irresistible. The archic is also the diplomatic method.

C5.54. N.B.--Rhetorical artifice of winding-up a speech with a joke.
This is the popular orator. Xenophon the prototype himself perhaps.

C6.3. Is this by chance a situation in Elizabethan or other drama?
It's tragic enough for anything.

C6.4. Admirable colloquial style: "well done, me!"

C6.6, fin. Beautifully-sounding sentence [in the Greek]. Like harp or
viol with its dying mournful note.

C6.8. A new tributary for the archic man, and a foothold in the
enemy's country.

C6.9, fin. As to this daughter, /vide infra/. Who do you think will
win her? We like her much already.

C6.11. The first flutings of this tale. The lady of Susa, quasi-
historic, or wholly imaginative, or mixed?



BOOK V

[C.1] Such were the deeds they did and such the words they spoke. Then
Cyrus bade them set a guard over the share chosen for Cyaxares,
selecting those whom he knew were most attached to their lord, "And
what you have given me," he added, "I accept with pleasure, but I hold
it at the service of those among you who would enjoy it the most."

At that one of the Medes who was passionately fond of music said, "In
truth, Cyrus, yesterday evening I listened to the singing-girls who
are yours to-day, and if you could give me one of them, I would far
rather be serving on this campaign than sitting at home."

And Cyrus said, "Most gladly I will give her; she is yours. And I
believe I am more grateful to you for asking than you can be to me for
giving; I am so thirsty to gratify you all."

So this suitor carried off his prize. [2] And then Cyrus called to his
side Araspas the Mede, who had been his comrade in boyhood. It was he
to whom Cyrus gave the Median cloak he was wearing when he went back
to Persia from his grandfather's court. Now he summoned him, and asked
him to take care of the tent and the lady from Susa. [3] She was the
wife of Abradatas, a Susian, and when the Assyrian army was captured
it happened that her husband was away: his master had sent him on an
embassy to Bactria to conclude an alliance there, for he was the
friend and host of the Bactrian king. And now Cyrus asked Araspas to
guard the captive lady until her husband could take her back himself.
[4] To that Araspas replied, "Have you seen the lady whom you bid me
guard?"

"No, indeed," said Cyrus, "certainly I have not."

"But I have," rejoined the other, "I saw here when we chose her for
you. When we came into the tent, we did not make her out at first, for
she was seated on the ground with all her maidens round her, and she
was clad in the same attire as her slaves, but when we looked at them
all to discover the mistress, we soon saw that one outshone the
others, although she was veiled and kept her eyes on the ground. [5]
And when we bade her rise, all her women rose with her, and then we
saw that she was marked out from them all by her height, and her noble
bearing, and her grace, and the beauty that shone through her mean
apparel. And, under her veil, we could see the big tear-drops
trickling down her garments to her feet. [6] At that sight the eldest
of us said, 'Take comfort, lady, we know that your husband was
beautiful and brave, but we have chosen you a man to-day who is no
whit inferior to him in face or form or mind or power; Cyrus, we
believe, is more to be admired than any soul on earth, and you shall
be his from this day forward.' But when the lady heard that, she rent
the veil that covered her head and gave a pitiful cry, while her
maidens lifted up their voice and wept with their mistress. [7] And
thus we could see her face, and her neck, and her arms, and I tell
you, Cyrus," he added, "I myself, and all who looked on her, felt that
there never was, and never had been, in broad Asia a mortal woman half
so fair as she. Nay, but you must see her for yourself."

[8] "Say, rather, I must not," answered Cyrus, "if she be such as you
describe."

"And why not?" asked the young man.

"Because," said he, "if the mere report of her beauty could persuade
me to go and gaze on her to-day, when I have not a moment to spare, I
fear she would win me back again and perhaps I should neglect all I
have to do, and sit and gaze at her for ever."

[9] At that the young man laughed outright and said:

"So you think, Cyrus, that the beauty of any human creature can compel
a man to do wrong against his will? Surely if that were the nature of
beauty, all men would feel its force alike. [10] See how fire burns
all men equally; it is the nature of it so to do; but these flowers of
beauty, one man loves them, and another loves them not, nor does every
man love the same. For love is voluntary, and each man loves what he
chooses to love. The brother is not enamoured of his own sister, nor
the father of his own daughter; some other man must be the lover.
Reverence and law are strong enough to break the heart of passion.
[11] But if a law were passed saying, 'Eat not, and thou shalt not
starve; Drink not, and thou shalt not thirst; Let not cold bite thee
in winter nor heat inflame thee in summer,' I say there is no law that
could compel us to obey; for it is our nature to be swayed by these
forces. But love is voluntary; each man loves to himself alone, and
according as he chooses, just as he chooses his cloak or his sandals."

[12] "Then," said Cyrus, "if love be voluntary, why cannot a man cease
to love when he wishes? I have seen men in love," said he, "who have
wept for very agony, who were the very slaves of those they loved,
though before the fever took them they thought slavery the worst of
evils. I have seen them make gifts of what they ill could spare, I
have seen them praying, yes, praying, to be rid of their passion, as
though it were any other malady, and yet unable to shake it off; they
were bound hand and foot by a chain of something stronger than iron.
There they stood at the beck and call of their idols, and that without
rhyme or reason; and yet, poor slaves, they make no attempt to run
away, in spite of all they suffer; on the contrary, they mount guard
over their tyrants, for fear these should escape."

[13] But the young man spoke in answer: "True," he said, "there are
such men, but they are worthless scamps, and that is why, though they
are always praying to die and be put out of their misery and though
ten thousand avenues lie open by which to escape from life, they never
take one of them. These are the very men who are prepared to steal and
purloin the goods of others, and yet you know yourself, when they do
it, you are the first to say stealing is not done under compulsion,
and you blame the thief and the robber; you do not pity him, you
punish him. [14] In the same way, beautiful creatures do not compel
others to love them or pursue them when it is wrong, but these good-
for-nothing scoundrels have no self-control, and then they lay the
blame on love. But the nobler type of man, the true gentleman,
beautiful and brave, though he desire gold and splendid horses and
lovely women, can still abstain from each and all alike, and lay no
finger on them against the law of honour. [15] Take my own case," he
added, "I have seen this lady myself, and passing fair I found her,
and yet here I stand before you, and am still your trooper and can
still perform my duty."

[16] "I do not deny it," said Cyrus; "probably you came away in time.
Love takes a little while to seize and carry off his victim. A man may
touch fire for a moment and not be burnt; a log will not kindle all at
once; and yet for all that, I am not disposed to play with fire or
look on beauty. You yourself, my friend, if you will follow my advice,
will not let your own eyes linger there too long; burning fuel will
only burn those who touch it, but beauty can fire the beholder from
afar, until he is all aflame with love."

[17] "Oh, fear me not, Cyrus," answered he; "if I looked till the end
of time I could not be made to do what ill befits a man."

"A fair answer," said Cyrus. "Guard her then, as I bid you, and be
careful of her. This lady may be of service to us all one day."

[18] With these words they parted. But afterwards, after the young man
saw from day to day how marvellously fair the woman was, and how noble
and gracious in herself, after he took care of her, and fancied that
she was not insensible to what he did, after she set herself, through
her attendants, to care for his wants and see that all things were
ready for him when he came in, and that he should lack for nothing if
ever he were sick, after all this, love entered his heart and took
possession, and it may be there was nothing surprising in his fate. So
at least it was.

[19] Meanwhile Cyrus, who was anxious that the Medes and the allies
should stay with him of their own free choice, called a meeting of
their leading men, and when they were come together he spoke as
follows:

[20] "Sons of the Medes and gentlemen all, I am well aware it was not
from need of money that you went out with me, nor yet in order to
serve Cyaxares; you came for my sake. You marched with me by night,
you ran into danger at my side, simply to do me honour. [21] Unless I
were a miscreant, I could not but be grateful for such kindness. But I
must confess that at present I lack the ability to make a fit
requital. This I am not ashamed to tell you, but I would feel ashamed
to add, 'If you will stay with me, I will be sure to repay you,' for
that would look as though I spoke to bribe you into remaining.
Therefore I will not say that; I will say instead, 'Even if you listen
to Cyaxares and go back to-day, I will still act so that you shall
praise me, I will not forget you in the day of my good fortune.' [22]
For myself, I will never go back; I cannot, for I must confirm my oath
to the Hyrcanians and the pledge I gave them; they are my friends and
I shall never be found a traitor to them. Moreover, I am bound to
Gobryas, who has offered us the use of his castle, his territory, and
his power; and I would not have him repent that he came to me. [23]
Last of all, and more than all, when the great gods have showered such
blessings on us, I fear them and I reverence them too much to turn my
back on all they have given us. This, then, is what I myself must do;
it is for you to decide as you think best, and you will acquaint me
with your decision."

[24] So he spoke, and the first to answer was the Mede who had claimed
kinship with Cyrus in the old days.

"Listen to me," he said, "O king! For king I take you to be by right
of nature; even as the king of the hive among the bees, whom all the
bees obey and take for their leader of their own free will; where he
stays they stay also, not one of them departs, and where he goes, not
one of them fails to follow; so deep a desire is in them to be ruled
by him. [25] Even thus, I believe, do our men feel towards you. Do you
remember the day you left us to go home to Persia? Was there one of
us, young or old, who did not follow you until Astyages turned us
back? And later, when you returned to bring us aid, did we not see for
ourselves how your friends poured after you? And again, when you had
set your heart on this expedition, we know that the Medes flocked to
your standard with one consent. [26] To-day we have learnt to feel
that even in an enemy's country we may be of good heart if you are
with us, but, without you, we should be afraid even to return to our
homes. The rest may speak for themselves, and tell you how they will
act, but for myself, Cyrus, and for those under me, I say we will
stand by you; we shall not grow weary of gazing at you, and we will
continue to endure your benefits."

[27] Thereupon Tigranes spoke:

"Do not wonder, Cyrus, if I am silent now. The soul within me is
ready, not to offer counsel, but to do your bidding." [28] And the
Hyrcanian chieftain said, "For my part, if you Medes turn back to-day
I shall say it was the work of some evil genius, who could not brook
the fulfilment of your happiness. For no human heart could think of
retiring when the foe is in flight, refusing to receive his sword when
he surrenders it, rejecting him when he offers himself and all that he
calls his own; above all, when we have a prince of men for our leader,
one who, I swear it by the holy gods, takes delight to do us service,
not to enrich himself."

[29] Thereupon the Medes cried with one consent:

"It was you, Cyrus, who led us out, and it is you who must lead us
home again, when the right moment comes."

And when Cyrus heard that, he prayed aloud:

"O most mighty Zeus, I supplicate thee, suffer me to outdo these
friends of mine in courtesy and kindly dealing."

[30] Upon that he gave his orders. The rest of the army were to place
their outposts and see to their own concerns, while the Persians took
the tents allotted to them, and divided them among their cavalry and
infantry, to suit the needs of either arm. Then they arranged for the
stewards to wait on them in future, bring them all they needed, and
keep their horses groomed, so that they themselves might be free for
the work of war. Thus they spent that day.

[C.2] But on the morrow they set out for their march to Gobryas. Cyrus
rode on horseback at the head of his new Persian cavalry, two thousand
strong, with as many more behind them, carrying their shields and
swords, and the rest of the army followed in due order. The cavalry
were told to make their new attendants understand that they would be
punished if they were caught falling behind the rear-guard, or riding
in advance of the column, or straggling on either flank. [2] Towards
evening of the second day the army found themselves before the castle
of Gobryas, and they saw that the place was exceedingly strong and
that all preparations had been made for the stoutest possible defence.
They noticed also that great herds of cattle and endless flocks of
sheep and goats had been driven up under the shelter of the castle
walls. [3] Then Gobryas sent word to Cyrus, bidding him ride round and
see where the place was easiest of approach, and meanwhile send his
trustiest Persians to enter the fortress and bring him word what they
found within. [4] Cyrus, who really wished to see if the citadel
admitted of attack in case Gobryas proved false, rode all round the
walls, and found they were too strong at every point. Presently the
messengers who had gone in brought back word that there were supplies
enough to last a whole generation and still not fail the garrison. [5]
While Cyrus was wondering what this could mean, Gobryas himself came
out, and all his men behind him, carrying wine and corn and barley,
and driving oxen and goats and swine, enough to feast the entire host.
[6] And his stewards fell to distributing the stores at once, and
serving up a banquet. Then Gobryas invited Cyrus to enter the castle
now that all the garrison had left it, using every precaution he might
think wise; and Cyrus took him at his word, and sent in scouts and a
strong detachment before he entered the palace himself. Once within,
he had the gates thrown open and sent for all his own friends and
officers. [7] And when they joined him, Gobryas had beakers of gold
brought out, and pitchers, and goblets, and costly ornaments, and
golden coins without end, and all manner of beautiful things, and last
of all he sent for his own daughter, tall and fair, a marvel of beauty
and stateliness, still wearing mourning for her brother. And her
father said to Cyrus, "All these riches I bestow on you for a gift,
and I put my daughter in your hands, to deal with as you think best.
We are your suppliants; I but three days gone for my son, and she this
day for her brother; we beseech you to avenge him."

[8] And Cyrus made answer:

"I gave you my promise before that if you kept faith with me I would
avenge you, so far as in me lay, and to-day I see the debt is due, and
the promise I made to you I repeat to your daughter; God helping me, I
will perform it. As for these costly gifts," he added, "I accept them,
and I give them for a dowry to your daughter, and to him who may win
her hand in marriage. One gift only I will take with me when I go, but
that is a thing so precious that if I changed it for all the wealth of
Babylon or the whole world itself I could not go on my way with half
so blithe a heart."

[9] And Gobryas wondered what this rare thing could be, half
suspecting it might be his daughter. "What is it, my lord?" said he.
And Cyrus answered, "I will tell you. A man may hate injustice and
impiety and lies, but if no one offers him vast wealth or unbridled
power or impregnable fortresses or lovely children, he dies before he
can show what manner of man he is. [10] But you have placed everything
in my hands to-day, this mighty fortress, treasures of every kind,
your own power, and a daughter most worthy to be won. And thus you
have shown all men that I could not sin against my friend and my host,
nor act unrighteously for the sake of wealth, nor break my plighted
word of my own free will. [11] This is your gift, and, so long as I am
a just man and known to be such, receiving the praise of my fellow-
men, I will never forget it; I will strive to repay you with every
honour I can give. [12] Doubt not," he added, "but that you will find
a husband worthy of your daughter. I have many a good man and true
among my friends, and one of them will win her hand; but I could not
say whether he will have less wealth, or more, than what you offer me.
Only of one thing you may be certain; there are those among them who
will not admire you one whit the more because of the splendour of your
gifts; they will only envy me and supplicate the gods that one day it
will be given to them to show that they too are loyal to their
friends, that they too will never yield to their foes while life is in
them, unless some god strike them down; that they too would never
sacrifice virtue and fair renown for all the wealth you proffer and
all the treasure of Syria and Assyria to boot. Such is the nature,
believe me, of some who are seated here."

[13] And Gobryas smiled. "By heaven, I wish you would point them out
to me, and I would beg you to give me one of them to be my son-in-
law." And Cyrus said, "You will not need to learn their names from me;
follow us, and you will be able to point them out yourself."

[14] With these words he rose, clasped the hand of Gobryas, and went
out, all his men behind him. And though Gobryas pressed him to stay
and sup in the citadel, he would not, but took his supper in the camp
and constrained Gobryas to take his meal with them. [15] And there,
lying on a couch of leaves, he put this question to him, 'Tell me,
Gobryas, who has the largest store of coverlets, yourself, or each of
us?" And the Assyrian answered, "You, I know, have more than I, more
coverlets, more couches, and a far larger dwelling-place, for your
home is earth and heaven, and every nook may be a couch, and for your
coverlets you need not count the fleeces of your flocks, but the
brushwood, and the herbage of hill and plain."

[16] Nevertheless, when the meal began, it must be said that Gobryas,
seeing the poverty of what was set before him, thought at first that
his own men were far more open-handed than the Persians. [17] But his
mood changed as he watched the grace and decorum of the company; and
saw that not a single Persian who had been schooled would ever gape,
or snatch at the viands, or let himself be so absorbed in eating that
he could attend to nothing else; these men prided themselves on
showing their good sense and their intelligence while they took their
food, just as a perfect rider sits his horse with absolute composure,
and can look and listen and talk to some purpose while he puts him
through his paces. To be excited or flustered by meat and drink was in
their eyes something altogether swinish and bestial. [18] Nor did
Gobryas fail to notice that they only asked questions which were
pleasant to answer, and only jested in a manner to please; all their
mirth was as far from impertinence and malice as it was from vulgarity
and unseemliness. [19] And what struck him most was their evident
feeling that on a campaign, since the danger was the same for all, no
one was entitled to a larger share than any of his comrades; on the
contrary, it was thought the perfection of the feast to perfect the
condition of those who were to share the fighting. [20] And thus when
he rose to return home, the story runs that he said:

"I begin to understand, Cyrus, how it is that while we have more
goblets and more gold, more apparel and more wealth than you, yet we
ourselves are not worth as much. We are always trying to increase what
we possess, but you seem to set your hearts on perfecting your own
souls."

[21] But Cyrus only answered:

"My friend, be here without fail to-morrow, and bring all your cavalry
in full armour, so that we may see your power, and then lead us
through your country and show us who are hostile and who are
friendly."

[22] Thus they parted for the time and each saw to his own concerns.

But when the day dawned Gobryas appeared with his cavalry and led the
way. And Cyrus, as a born general would, not only supervised the
march, but watched for any chance to weaken the enemy and add to his
own strength. [23] With this in view, he summoned the Hyrcanian chief
and Gobryas himself; for they were the two he thought most likely to
give him the information that he needed.

"My friends," said he, "I think I shall not err if I trust to your
fidelity and consult you about the campaign. You, even more than I,
are bound to see that the Assyrians do not overpower us. For myself,
if I fail, there may well be some loophole of escape. But for you, if
the king conquers, I see nothing but enmity on every side. [24] For,
although he is my enemy, he bears me no malice, he only feels that it
is against his interest for me to be powerful and therefore he attacks
me. But you he hates with a bitter hatred, believing he is wronged by
you."

To this his companions answered that he must finish what he had to
say; they were well aware of the facts, and had the deepest interest
in the turn events might take.

[25] Thereupon Cyrus put his questions: "Does the king suppose that
you alone are his enemies, or do you know of others who hate him too?"
"Certainly we do," replied the Hyrcanian, "the Cadousians are his
bitterest foes, and they are both numerous and warlike. Then there are
the Sakians, our neighbours, who have suffered severely at his hands,
for he tried to subdue them as he subdued us."

[26] "Then you think," said Cyrus, "that they would be glad to attack
him in our company?" "Much more than glad," answered they; "if they
could manage to join us." "And what stands in their way?" asked he.
"The Assyrians themselves," said they, "the very people among whom you
are marching now." [27] At that Cyrus turned to Gobryas:

"And what of this lad who is now on the throne? Did you not charge him
with unbridled insolence?"

"Even so," replied Gobryas, "and I think he gave me cause." "Tell me,"
said Cyrus, "were you the only man he treated thus, or did others
suffer too?"

[28] "Many others," said Gobryas, "but some of them were weak, and why
should I weary you with the insults they endured? I will tell you of a
young man whose father was a much greater personage than I, and who
was himself, like my own son, a friend and comrade of the prince. One
day at a drinking-bout this monster had the youth seized and
mutilated, and why? Some say simply because a paramour of his own had
praised the boy's beauty and said his bride was a woman to be envied.
The king himself now asserts it was because he had tried to seduce his
paramour. That young man, eunuch as he is, is now at the head of his
province, for his father is dead."

[29] "Well," rejoined Cyrus, "I take it, you believe he would welcome
us, if he thought we came to help him?" "I am more than sure of that,"
said Gobryas, "but it is not so easy to set eyes on him." "And why?"
asked Cyrus. "Because if we are to join him at all, we must march
right past Babylon itself." [30] "And where is the difficulty in
that?" said Cyrus. "Heaven help us!" cried Gobryas. "The city has only
to open her gates, and she can send out an army ten thousand times as
large as yours. That is why," he added, "the Assyrians are less prompt
than they were at bringing in their weapons and their horses, because
those who have seen your army think it so very small, and their report
has got about. So that in my opinion it would be better to advance
with the utmost care."

[31] Cyrus listened and replied.

"You do well, Gobryas, my friend, in urging as much care as possible.
But I cannot myself see a safer route for us than the direct advance
on Babylon, if Babylon is the centre of the enemy's strength. They are
numerous, you say, and if they are in good heart, we shall soon know
it. [32] Now, if they cannot find us and imagine that we have
disappeared from fear of them, you may take it as certain that they
will be quit of the terror we have inspired. Courage will spring up in
its place, and grow the greater the longer we lie hid. But if we march
straight on then, we shall find them still mourning for the dead whom
we have slain, still nursing the wounds we have inflicted, still
trembling at the daring of our troops, still mindful of their own
discomfiture and flight. [33] Gobryas," he added, "be assured of this;
men in the mass, when aflame with courage, are irresistible, and when
their hearts fail them, the more numerous they are the worse the panic
that seizes them. [34] It comes upon them magnified by a thousand
lies, blanched by a thousand pallors, it gathers head from a thousand
terror-stricken looks, until it grows so great that no orator can
allay it by his words, no general arouse the old courage by a charge,
or revive the old confidence by retreat; the more their leader cheers
them on, the worse do the soldiers take their case to be. [35] Now by
all means let us see exactly how things stand with us. If from
henceforward victory must fall to those who can reckon the largest
numbers, your fears for us are justified, and we are indeed in fearful
danger; but if the old rule still holds, and battles are decided by
the qualities of those who fight, then, I say, take heart and you will
never fail. You will find far more stomach for the fight among our
ranks than theirs. [36] And to hearten you the more, take note of
this: our enemies are far fewer now than when we worsted them, far
weaker than when they fled from us, while we are stronger because we
are conquerors, and greater because fortune has been ours; yes, and
actually more numerous because you and yours have joined us, for I
would not have you hold your men too low, now that they are side by
side with us. In the company of conquerors, Gobryas, the hearts of the
followers beat high. [37] Nor should you forget," he added, "that the
enemy is well able to see us as it is, and the sight of us will
certainly not be more alarming if we wait for him where we are than if
we advance against him. That is my opinion, and now you must lead us
straight for Babylon."

[C.3] And so the march continued, and on the fourth day they found
themselves at the limit of the territory over which Gobryas ruled.
Since they were now in the enemy's country Cyrus changed the
disposition of his men, taking the infantry immediately under his own
command, with sufficient cavalry to support them, and sending the rest
of the mounted troops to scour the land. Their orders were to cut down
every one with arms in his hands, and drive in the rest, with all the
cattle they could find. The Persians were ordered to take part in this
raid, and though many came home with nothing for their trouble but a
toss from their horses, others brought back a goodly store of booty.

[2] When the spoil was all brought in, Cyrus summoned the officers of
the Medes and the Hyrcanians, as well as his own peers, and spoke as
follows:

"My friends, Gobryas has entertained us nobly; he has showered good
things upon us. What say you then? After we have set aside the
customary portion for the gods and a fair share for the army, shall we
not give all the rest of the spoil to him? Would it not be a noble
thing, a sign and symbol at the outset that we desire to outdo in
well-doing those who do good to us?"

[3] At that all his hearers with one consent applauded, and a certain
officer rose and said:

"By all means, Cyrus, let us do so. I myself cannot but feel that
Gobryas must have thought us almost beggars because we were not laden
with coins of gold and did not drink from golden goblets. But if we do
this, he will understand that men may be free and liberal without the
help of gold."

[4] "Come then," said Cyrus, "let us pay the priests our debt to
heaven, select what the army requires, and then summon Gobryas and
give the rest to him."

So they took what they needed and gave all the rest to Gobryas.

[5] Forthwith Cyrus pressed on towards Babylon, his troops in battle
order. But as the Assyrians did not come out to meet them, he bade
Gobryas ride forward and deliver this message:

"If the king will come out to fight for his land, I, Gobryas, will
fight for him, but, if he will not defend his own country, we must
yield to the conquerors."

[6] So Gobryas rode forward, just far enough to deliver the message in
safety. And the king sent a messenger to answer him:

"Thy master says to thee: 'It repents me, Gobryas, not that I slew thy
son, but that I stayed my hand from slaying thee. And now if ye will
do battle, come again on the thirtieth day from hence. We have no
leisure now, our preparations are still on foot.'"

[7] And Gobryas made answer:

"It repents thee: may that repentance never cease! I have begun to
make thee suffer, since the day repentance took hold on thee."

[8] Then Gobryas brought back the words of the king to Cyrus, and
Cyrus led his army off, and then he summoned Gobryas and said to him:

"Surely you told me that you thought the man who was made an eunuch by
the king would be upon our side?"

"And I am sure he will," answered Gobryas, "for we have spoken freely
to each other many a time, he and I." [9] "Then," said Cyrus, "you
must go to him when you think the right moment has come: and you must
so act at first that only he and you may know what he intends, and
when you are closeted with him, if you find he really wishes to be a
friend, you must contrive that his friendship remain a secret: for in
war a man can scarcely do his friends more good than by a semblance of
hostility, or his enemies more harm than under the guise of
friendship." [10] "Aye," answered Gobryas, "and I know that Gadatas
would pay a great price to punish the king of Assyria. But it is for
us to consider what he can best do." [11] "Tell me now," rejoined
Cyrus, "you spoke of an outpost, built against the Hyrcanians and the
Sakians, which was to protect Assyria in time of war,--could the
eunuch be admitted there by the commandant if he came with a force at
his back?" "Certainly he could," said Gobryas, "if he were as free
from suspicion as he is to-day." [12] "And free he would be," Cyrus
went on, "if I were to attack his strongholds as though in earnest,
and he were to repel me in force. I might capture some of his men, and
he some of my soldiers, or some messengers sent by me to those you say
are the enemies of Assyria, and these prisoners would let it be known
that they were on their way to fetch an army with scaling-ladders to
attack this fortress, and the eunuch, hearing their story, would
pretend that he came to warn the commandant in time." [13]
"Undoubtedly," said Gobryas, "if things went thus, the commandant
would admit him; he would even beg him to stay there until you
withdrew."

"And then," Cyrus continued, "once inside the walls, he could put the
place into our hands?" [14] "We may suppose so," said Gobryas. "He
would be there to settle matters within, and you would be redoubling
the pressure from without."

"Then be off at once," said Cyrus, "and do your best to teach him his
part, and when you have arranged affairs, come back to me; and as for
pledges of good faith, you could offer him none better than those you
received from us yourself."

[15] Then Gobryas made haste and was gone, and the eunuch welcomed him
gladly; he agreed to everything and helped to arrange all that was
needed. Presently Gobryas brought back word that he thought the eunuch
had everything in readiness, and so, without more ado, Cyrus made his
feigned attack on the following day, and was beaten off. [16] But on
the other hand there was a fortress, indicated by Gadatas himself,
that Cyrus took. The messengers Cyrus had sent out, telling them
exactly where to go, fell into the hands of Gadatas: some were allowed
to escape--their business was to fetch the troops and carry the
scaling-ladders--but the rest were narrowly examined in the presence
of many witnesses, and when Gadatas heard the object of their journey
he got his equipment together and set out in the night at full speed
to take the news. [17] In the end he made his way into the fortress,
trusted and welcomed as a deliverer, and for a time he helped the
commandant to the best of his ability. But as soon as Cyrus appeared
he seized the place, aided by the Persian prisoners he had taken. [18]
This done, and having set things in order within the fortress, Gadatas
went out to Cyrus, bowed before him according to the custom of his
land, and said, "Cyrus, may joy be yours!"

[19] "Joy is mine already," answered he, "for you, God helping you,
have brought it to me. You must know," he added, "that I set great
store by this fortress, and rejoice to leave it in the hands of my
allies here. And for yourself, Gadatas," he added, "if the Assyrian
has robbed you of the ability to beget children, remember he has not
stolen your power to win friends; you have made us yours, I tell you,
by this deed, and we will stand by as faithfully as sons and grandsons
of your own."

[20] So Cyrus spoke. And at that instant the Hyrcanian chief, who had
only just learnt what had happened, came running up to him, and
seizing him by the hand cried out:

"O Cyrus, you godsend to your friends! How often you make me thank the
gods for bringing me to you!"

[21] "Off with you, then," said Cyrus, "and occupy this fortress for
which you bless me so. Take it and make the best use of it you can,
for your own nation, and for all our allies, and above all for
Gadatas, our friend, who won it and surrenders it to us."

[22] "Then," said the chieftain, "as soon as the Cadousians arrive and
the Sakians and my countrymen, we must, must we not? call a council of
them all, so that we may consult together, and see how best to turn it
to account."

[23] Cyrus thought the proposal good, and when they met together it
was decided to garrison the post with a common force, chosen from all
who were concerned that it should remain friendly and be an outer
balwark to overawe the Assyrians. [24] This heightened the enthusiasm
of them all, Cadousians, Sakians, and Hyrcanians, and their levies
rose high, until the Cadousians sent in 20,000 light infantry and 4000
cavalry, and the Sakians 11,000 bowmen, 10,000 on foot and 1000
mounted, while the Hyrcanians were free to despatch all their reserves
of infantry and make up their horsemen to a couple of thousand strong,
whereas previously the larger portion of their cavalry had been left
at home to support the Cadousians and Sakians against Assyria.

[25] And while Cyrus was kept in the fortress, organising and
arranging everything, many of the Assyrians from the country round
brought in their horses and handed over their arms, being by this time
in great dread of their neighbours.

[26] Soon after this Gadatas came to Cyrus and told him that
messengers had come to say that the king of Assyria, learning what had
happened to the fortress, was beside himself with anger, and was
preparing to attack his territory. "If you, Cyrus," said he, "will let
me go now, I will try to save my fortresses: the rest is of less
account." [27] Cyrus said, "If you go now, when will you reach home?"
And Gadatas answered, "On the third day from this I can sup in my own
house." "Do you think," asked Cyrus, "that you will find the Assyrian
already there?" "I am sure of it," he answered, "for he will make
haste while he thinks you are still far off." [28] "And I," said
Cyrus, "when could I be there with my army?" But to this Gadatas made
answer, "The army you have now, my lord, is very large, and you could
not reach my home in less than six days or seven." "Well," Cyrus
replied, "be off yourself: make all speed, and I will follow as best I
can."

[29] So Gadatas was gone, and Cyrus called together all the officers
of the allies, and a great and goodly company they seemed, noble
gentlemen, beautiful and brave. And Cyrus stood up among them all and
said:

[30] "My allies and my friends, Gadatas has done deeds that we all
feel worthy of high reward, and that too before ever he had received
any benefit from us. The Assyrians, we hear, have now invaded his
territory, to take vengeance for the monstrous injury they consider he
has done them, and moreover, they doubtless argue that if those who
revolt to us escape scot-free, while those who stand by them are cut
to pieces, ere long they will not have a single supporter on their
side. [31] To-day, gentlemen, we may do a gallant deed, if we rescue
Gadatas, our friend and benefactor; and truly it is only just and
right thus to repay gift for gift, and boon for boon. Moreover, as it
seems to me, what we accomplish will be much to our own interest. [32]
If all men see that we are ready to give blow for blow and sting for
sting, while we outdo our benefactors in generous deeds, it is only
natural that multitudes will long to be our friends, and no man care
to be our foe. [33] Whereas, if it be thought that we left Gadatas in
the lurch, how in heaven's name shall we persuade another to show us
any kindness? How shall we dare to think well of ourselves again? How
shall one of us look Gadatas in the face, when all of us, so many and
so strong, showed ourselves less generous than he, one single man and
in so sore a plight?"

[34] Thus Cyrus spoke, and all of them assented right willingly, and
said it must be done.

"Come then," concluded Cyrus, "since you are all of one mind with me,
let each of us choose an escort for our waggons and beasts of burden.
[35] Let us leave them behind us, and put Gobryas at their head. He is
acquainted with the roads, and for the rest he is a man of skill. But
we ourselves will push on with our stoutest men and our strongest
horses, taking provision for three days and no more: the lighter and
cheaper our gear the more gaily shall we break our fast and take our
supper and sleep on the road. [36] And now," said he, "let us arrange
the order of the march. You, Chrysantas, must lead the van with your
cuirassiers, since the road is broad and smooth, and you must put your
brigadiers in the first line, each regiment marching in file, for if
we keep close order we shall travel all the quicker and be all the
safer. [37] I put the cuirassiers in the front," he added, "because
they are our heaviest troops, and if the heaviest are leading, the
lighter cannot find it hard to follow: whereas where the swiftest lead
and the march is at night, it is no wonder if the column fall to
pieces: the vanguard is always running away. [38] And behind the
cuirassiers," he went on, "Artabazas is to follow with the Persian
targeteers and the bowmen, and behind them Andamyas the Mede with the
Median infantry, and then Embas and the Armenian infantry, and then
Artouchas with the Hyrcanians, and then Thambradas with the Sakian
foot, and finally Datamas with the Cadousians. [39] All these officers
will put their brigadiers in the first line, their targeteers on the
right, and their bowmen on the left of their own squares: this is the
order in which they will be of most use. [40] All the baggage-bearers
are to follow in the rear: and their officers must see that they get
everything together before they sleep, and present themselves betimes
in the morning, with all their gear, and always keep good order on the
march. [41] In support of the baggage-train," he added, "there will
be, first, Madatas the Persian with the Persian cavalry, and he too
must put his brigadiers in the front, each regiment following in
single file, as with the infantry. [42] Behind them Rambacas the Mede
and his cavalry, in the same order, and then you, Tigranes, and yours,
and after you the other cavalry leaders with the men they brought. The
Sakians will follow you, and last of all will come the Cadousians, who
were the last to join us, and you, Alkeunas, who are to command them,
for the present you will take complete control of the rear, and allow
no one to fall behind your men. [43] All of you alike, officers, and
all who respect yourselves, must be most careful to march in silence.
At night the ears, and not the eyes, are the channels of information
and the guides for action, and at night any confusion is a far more
serious matter than by day, and far more difficult to put right. For
this reason silence must be studied and order absolutely maintained.
[44] Whenever you mean to rise before daybreak, you must make the
night-watches as short and as numerous as possible, so that no one may
suffer on the march because of his long vigil before it; and when the
hour for the start arrives the horn must be blown. [45] Gentlemen, I
expect you all to present yourselves on the road to Babylon with
everything you require, and as each detachment starts, let them pass
down the word for those in the rear to follow."

[46] So the officers went to their quarters, and as they went they
talked of Cyrus, and what a marvellous memory he had, always naming
each officer as he assigned him his post. [47] The fact was Cyrus took
special pains over this: it struck him as odd that a mere mechanic
could know the names of all his tools, and a physician the names of
all his instruments, but a general be such a simpleton that he could
not name his own officers, the very tools he had to depend on each
time he wanted to seize a point or fortify a post or infuse courage or
inspire terror. Moreover it seemed to him only courteous to address a
man by name when he wished to honour him. [48] And he was sure that
the man who feels he is personally known to his commander is more
eager to be seen performing some noble feat of arms, and more careful
to refrain from all that is unseemly and base. [49] Cyrus thought it
would be quite foolish for him to give his orders in the style of
certain householders: "Somebody fetch the water, some one split the
wood." [50] After a command of that kind, every one looks at every one
else, and no one carries it out, every one is to blame, and no one is
ashamed or afraid, because there are so many beside himself. Therefore
Cyrus always named the officers whenever he gave an order.

[51] That, then, was his view of the matter. The army now took supper
and posted their guards and got their necessaries together and went to
rest. [52] And at midnight the horn was blown. Cyrus had told
Chrysantas he would wait for him at a point on the road in advance of
the troops, and therefore he went on in front himself with his own
staff, and waited till Chrysantas appeared shortly afterwards at the
head of his cuirassiers. [53] Then Cyrus put the guides under his
command, and told him to march on, but to go slowly until he received
a message, for all the troops were not yet on the road. This done,
Cyrus took his stand on the line of march, and as each division came
up, hurried it forward to its place, sending messengers meanwhile to
summon those who were still behind. [54] When all had started, he
despatched gallopers to Chrysantas to tell him that the whole army was
now under way, and that he might lead on as quick as he could. [55]
Then he galloped to the front himself, reined up, and quietly watched
the ranks defile before him. Whenever a division advanced silently and
in good order, he would ride up and ask their names and pay them
compliments; and if he saw any sign of confusion he would inquire the
reason and restore tranquillity. [56] One point remains to add in
describing his care that night; he sent forward a small but picked
body of infantry, active fellows all of them, in advance of the whole
army. They were to keep Chrysantas in sight, and he was not to lose
sight of them; they were to use their ears and all their wits, and
report at once to Chrysantas if they thought there was any need. They
had an officer to direct their movements, announce anything of
importance, and not trouble about trifles.

[57] Thus they pressed forward through the night, and when day broke
Cyrus ordered the mass of the cavalry to the front, the Cadousians
alone remaining with their own infantry, who brought up the rear, and
who were as much in need as others of cavalry support. But the rest of
the horsemen he sent ahead because it was ahead that the enemy lay,
and in case of resistance he was anxious to oppose them in battle-
order, while if they fled he wished no time to be lost in following up
the pursuit. [58] It was always arranged who were to give chase and
who were to stay with himself: he never allowed the whole army to be
broken up. [59] Thus Cyrus conducted the advance, but it is not to be
thought that he kept to one particular spot; he was always galloping
backwards and forwards, first at one point and then at another,
supervising everything and supplying any defect as it arose. Thus
Cyrus and his men marched forward.

[C.4] Now there was a certain officer in the cavalry with Gadatas, a
man of power and influence, who, when he saw that his master had
revolted from Assyria, thought to himself, "If anything should happen
to him, I myself could get from the king all that he possessed."

Accordingly he sent forward a man he could trust, with instructions
that, if he found the Assyrian army already in the territory of
Gadatas, he was to tell the king that he could capture Gadatas and all
who were with him, if he thought fit to make an ambuscade. [2] And the
messenger was also to say what force Gadatas had at his command and to
announce that Cyrus was not with him. Moreover, the officer stated the
road by which Gadatas was coming. Finally, to win the greater
confidence, he sent word to his own dependents and bade them deliver
up to the king of Assyria the castle which he himself commanded in the
province, with all that it contained: he would come himself, he added,
if possible, after he had slain Gadatas, and, even if he failed in
that, he would always stand by the king.

[3] Now the emissary rode as hard as he could and came before the king
and told his errand, and, hearing it, the king at once took over the
castle and formed an ambuscade, with a large body of horse and many
chariots, in a dense group of villages that lay upon the road. [4]
Gadatas, when he came near the spot, sent scouts ahead to explore, and
the king, as soon as he sighted them, ordered two or three of his
chariots and a handful of horsemen to dash away as though in flight,
giving the impression that they were few in number and panic-stricken.
At this the scouting party swept after them, signalling to Gadatas,
who also fell into the trap and gave himself up to the chase.

The Assyrians waited till the quarry was within their grasp and then
sprang out from their ambuscade. [5] The men, with Gadatas, seeing
what had happened, turned back and fled, as one might expect, with the
Assyrians at their heels, while the officer who had planned it all
stabbed Gadatas himself. He struck him in the shoulder, but the blow
was not mortal. Thereupon the traitor fled to the pursuers, and when
they found out who he was he galloped on with them, his horse at full
stretch, side by side with the king. [6] Naturally the men with the
slower horses were overtaken by the better mounted, and the fugitives,
already wearied by their long journey, were at the last extremity when
suddenly they caught sight of Cyrus advancing at the head of his army,
and were swept into safety, as glad and thankful, we may well believe,
as shipwrecked mariners into port.

[7] The first feeling of Cyrus was sheer astonishment, but he soon saw
how matters stood. The whole force of the Assyrian cavalry was rolling
on him, and he met it with his own army in perfect order, till the
enemy, realising what had happened, turned and fled. Then Cyrus
ordered his pursuing party to charge, while he followed more slowly at
the pace he thought the safest. [8] The enemy were utterly routed:
many of the chariots were taken, some had lost their charioteers,
others were seized in the sudden change of front, others surrounded by
the Persian cavalry. Right and left the conquerors cut down their
foes, and among them fell the officer who had dealt the blow at
Gadatas. [9] But of the Assyrian infantry, those who were besieging
the fortress of Gadatas escaped to the stronghold that had revolted
from him, or managed to reach an important city belonging to the king,
where he himself, his horsemen, and his chariots had taken refuge.

[10] After this exploit Cyrus went on to the territory of Gadatas, and
as soon as he had given orders to those who guarded the prisoners, he
went himself to visit the eunuch and see how it was with him after his
wound. Gadatas came out to meet him, his wound already bandaged. And
Cyrus was gladdened and said, "I came myself to see how it was with
you." [11] "And I," said Gadatas, "heaven be my witness, I came out to
see how a man would look who had a soul like yours. I cannot tell what
need you had of me, or what promise you ever gave me, to make you do
as you have done. I had shown you no kindness for your private self:
it was because you thought I had been of some little service to your
friends, that you came to help me thus, and help me you did, from
death to life. Left to myself I was lost. [12] By heaven above, I
swear it, Cyrus, if I had been a father as I was born to be, God knows
whether I could have found in the son of my loins so true a friend as
you. I know of sons--this king of ours is such an one, who has caused
his own father ten thousand times more trouble than ever he causes
you."

[13] And Cyrus made answer:

"You have overlooked a much more wonderful thing, Gadatas, to turn and
wonder at me."

"Nay," said Gadatas, "what could that be?"

"That all these Persians," he answered, "are so zealous in your
behalf, and all these Medes and Hyrcanians, and every one of our
allies, Armenians, Sakians, Cadousians."

[14] Then Gadatas prayed aloud:

"O Father Zeus, may the gods heap blessings on them also, but above
all on him who has made them what they are! And now, Cyrus, that I may
entertain as they deserve these men you praise, take the gifts I bring
you as their host, the best I have it in my power to bring."

And with the word he brought out stores of every kind, enough for all
to over sacrifice who listed; and the whole army was entertained in a
manner worthy of their feat and their success.

[15] Meanwhile the Cadousians had been always in the rear, unable to
share in the pursuit, and they longed to achieve some exploit of their
own. So their chieftain, with never a word to Cyrus, led them forth
alone, and raided the country towards Babylon. But, as soon as they
were scattered the Assyrians came out from their city of refuge in
good battle-order. [16] When they saw that the Cadousians were
unsupported they attacked them, killing the leader himself and numbers
of his men, capturing many of their horses and retaking the spoil they
were in the act of driving away. The king pursued as far as he thought
safe, and then turned back, and the Cadousians at last found safety in
their own camp, though even the vanguard only reached it late in the
afternoon. [17] When Cyrus saw what had happened he went out to meet
them, succouring every wounded man and sending him off to Gadatas at
once, to have his wounds dressed, while he helped to house the others
in their quarters, and saw that they had all they needed, his Peers
aiding him, for at such times noble natures will give help with all
their hearts. [18] Still it was plain to see that he was sorely vexed,
and when the hour for dinner came, and the others went away, he was
still there on the ground with the attendants and the surgeons; not a
soul would he leave uncared for if anything could be done: he either
saw to it himself or sent for the proper aid.

[19] So for that night they rested. But with daybreak Cyrus sent out a
herald and summoned a gathering of all the officers and the whole
Cadousian army, and spoke as follows:

"My friends and allies, what has happened is only natural; for it is
human nature to err, and I cannot find it astonishing. Still we may
gain at least one advantage from what has occurred, if we learn that
we must never cut off from our main body a detachment weaker than the
force of the enemy. [20] I do not say that one is never to march
anywhere, if necessary, with an even smaller fraction than the
Cadousians had; but, before doing so you must communicate with some
one able to bring up reinforcements, and then, though you may be
trapped yourself, it is at least probable that your friends behind you
may foil the foilers, and divert them from your own party: there are
fifty ways in which one can embarrass the enemy and save one's
friends. Thus separation need not mean isolation, and union with the
main force may still be kept, whereas if you sally forth without
telling your plan, you are no better off than if you were alone in the
field. [21] However, God willing, we shall take our revenge for this
ere long; indeed, as soon as you have breakfasted, I will lead you out
to the scene of yesterday's skirmish, and there we will bury those who
fell, and show our enemies that the very field where they thought
themselves victorious is held by those who are stronger than they:
they shall never look again with joy upon the spot where they slew our
comrades. Or else, if they refuse to come out and meet us, we will
burn their villages and harry all their land, so that in lieu of
rejoicing at the sight of what they did to us, they shall gnash their
teeth at the spectacle of their own disasters. [22] Go now," said he,
"the rest of you, and take your breakfast forthwith, but let the
Cadousians first elect a leader in accordance with their own laws, and
one who will guide them well and wisely, by the grace of God, and with
our human help, if they should need it. And when you have chosen your
leader, and had your breakfast, send him hither to me."

[23] So they did as Cyrus bade them, and when he led the army out, he
stationed their new general close to his own person, and told him to
keep his detachment there, "So that you and I," said he, "may rekindle
the courage in their souls."

In this order they marched out, and thus they buried the Cadousian
dead and ravaged the country. Which done, they went back to the
province of Gadatas, laden with supplies taken from the foe.

[24] Now Cyrus felt that those who had come over to his side and who
dwelt in the neighbourhood of Babylon would be sure to suffer unless
he were constantly there himself, and so he bade all the prisoners he
set free take a message to the king, and he himself despatched a
herald to say that he would leave all the tillers of the soil
unmolested and unhurt if the Assyrian would let those who had come
over to him continue their work in peace. [25] "And remember," he
added, "that even if you try to hinder my friends, it is only a few
whom you could stop, whereas there is a vast territory of yours that I
could allow to be cultivated. As for the crops," he added, "if we have
war, it will be the conqueror, I make no doubt, who will reap them,
but if we have peace, it will be you. If, however, any of my people
take up arms against you, or any of yours against me, we must, of
course, each of us, defend ourselves as best we can."

[26] With this message Cyrus despatched the herald, and when the
Assyrians heard it, they urged the king to accept the proposal, and so
limit the war as much as possible. [27] And he, whether influenced by
his own people or because he desired it himself, consented to the
terms. So an agreement was drawn up, proclaiming peace to the tillers
of the soil and war to all who carried arms.

[28] Thus Cyrus arranged matters for the husbandmen, and he asked his
own supporters among the drovers to bring their herds, if they liked,
into his dominions and leave them there, while he treated the enemy's
cattle as booty wherever he could, so that his allies found attraction
in the campaign. For the risk was no greater if they took what they
needed, while the knowledge that they were living at the enemy's
expense certainly seemed to lighten the labour of the war.

[29] When the time came for Cyrus to go back, and the final
preparations were being made, Gadatas brought him gifts of every kind,
the produce of a vast estate, and among the cattle a drove of horses,
taken from cavalry of his own, whom he distrusted owing to the late
conspiracy. [30] And when he brought them he said, "Cyrus, this day I
give you these for your own, and I would pray you to make such use of
them as you think best, but I would have you remember that all else
which I call mine is yours as well. For there is no son of mine, nor
can there ever be, sprung from my own loins, to whom I may leave my
wealth: when I die myself, my house must perish with me, my family and
my name. [31] And I must suffer this, Cyrus, I swear to you by the
great gods above us, who see all things and hear all things, though
never by word or deed did I commit injustice or foulness of any kind."

But here the words died on his lips; he burst into tears over his
sorrows, and could say no more. [32] Cyrus was touched with pity at
his suffering and said to him:

"Let me accept the horses, for in that I can help you, if I set loyal
riders on them, men of a better mind, methinks, than those who had
them before, and I myself can satisfy a wish that has long been mine,
to bring my Persian cavalry up to ten thousand men. But take back, I
pray you, all these other riches, and guard them safely against the
time when you may find me able to vie with you in gifts. If I left you
now so hugely in your debt, heaven help me if I could hold up my head
again for very shame."

[33] Thereto Gadatas made answer, "In all things I trust you, and will
trust you, for I see your heart. But consider whether I am competent
to guard all this myself. [34] While I was at peace with the king, the
inheritance I had from my father was, it may be, the fairest in all
the land: it was near that mighty Babylon, and all the good things
that can be gathered from a great city fell into our laps, and yet
from all the trouble of it, the noise and the bustle, we could be free
at once by turning our backs and coming home here. But now that we are
at war, the moment you have left us we are sure to be attacked,
ourselves and all our wealth, and methinks we shall have a sorry life
of it, our enemies at our elbow and far stronger than ourselves. [35]
I seem to hear some one say, why did you not think of this before you
revolted? But I answer, Cyrus, because the soul within me was stung
beyond endurance by my wrongs; I could not sit and ponder the safest
course, I was always brooding over one idea, always in travail of one
dream, praying for the day of vengeance on the miscreant, the enemy of
God and man, whose hatred never rested, once aroused, once he
suspected a man, not of doing wrong, but of being better than himself.
[36] And because he is a villain, he will always find, I know, worse
villains that himself to aid him, but if one day a nobler rival should
appear--have no concern, Cyrus, you will never need to do battle with
such an one, yonder fiend would deal with him and never cease to plot
against him until he had dragged him in the dust, only because he was
the better man. And to work me trouble and disaster, he and his wicked
tools will, I fear me, have strength enough and to spare."

[37] Cyrus thought there was much in what he said, and he answered
forthwith:

"Tell me, Gadatas, did we not put a stout garrison in your fortress,
so as to make it safe for you whenever you needed it, and are you not
taking the field with us now, so that, if the gods be on our side as
they are to-day, that scoundrel may fear you, not you him? Go now,
bring with you all you have that is sweet to look on and to love, and
then join our march: you shall be, I am persuaded, of the utmost
service to me, and I, so far as in me lies, will give you help for
help."

[38] When Gadatas heard that, he breathed again, and he said:

"Could I really be in time to make my preparations and be back before
you leave? I would fain take my mother with me on the march."

"Assuredly," said Cyrus, "you will be in time: for I will wait until
you say that all is ready."

[39] So it came to pass that Gadatas went his way, and with the aid of
Cyrus put a strong garrison in his fortress, and got together the
wealth of his broad estates. And moreover he brought with him in his
own retinue servants he could trust and in whom he took delight, as
well as many others in whom he put no trust at all, and these he
compelled to bring their wives with them, and their sisters, that so
they might be bound to his service.

[40] Thus Gadatas went with Cyrus, and Cyrus kept him ever at his
side, to show him the roads and the places for water and fodder and
food, and lead them where there was most abundance.

[41] At last they came in sight of Babylon once more, and it seemed to
Cyrus that the road they were following led under the very walls.
Therefore he summoned Gobryas and Gadatas, and asked them if there was
not another way, so that he need not pass so close to the ramparts.
[42] "There are many other ways, my lord," answered Gobryas, "but I
thought you would certainly want to pass as near the city as possible,
and display the size and splendour of your army to the king. I knew
that when your force was weaker you advanced to his walls, and let him
see us, few as we were, and I am persuaded that if he has made any
preparation for battle now, as he said he would, when he sees the
power you have brought with you, he will think once more that he is
unprepared."

[435] But Cyrus said:

"Does it seem strange to you, Gobryas, that when I had a far smaller
army I took it right up to the enemy's walls, and to-day when my force
is greater I will not venture there? [44] You need not think it
strange: to march up is not the same as to march past. Every leader
will march up with his troops disposed in the best order for battle
and a wise leader will draw them off so as to secure safety rather
than sped. [45] But in marching past there is no means of avoiding
long straggling lines of waggons, long strings of baggage-bearers, and
all these must be screened by the fighting-force so as never to leave
the baggage unprotected. [46] But this must mean a thin weak order for
the fighting-men, and if the enemy choose to attack at any point with
their full force, they can strike with far more weight than any of the
troops available to meet them at the moment. [47] Again, the length of
line means a long delay in bringing up relief, whereas the enemy have
only a handsbreadth to cover as they rush out from the walls or
retire. [48] But now, if we leave a distance between ourselves and
them as wide as our line is long, not only with they realise our
numbers plainly enough, but our veil of glittering armour will make
the whole multitude more formidable in their eyes. [49] And, if they
do attack us anywhere, we shall be able to foresee their advance a
long way off and be quite prepared to give them welcome. But it is far
more likely, gentlemen," he added, "that they will not make the
attempt, with all that ground to cover from the walls, unless they
imagine that their whole force is superior to the whole of ours: they
know that retreat will be difficult and dangerous."

[50] So Cyrus spoke, and his listeners felt that he was right, and
Gobryas led the army by the way that he advised. And as one detachment
after another passed the city, Cyrus strengthened the protection for
the rear and so withdrew in safety.

[51] Marching in this order, he came back at last to his first
starting-point, on the frontier between Assyria and Media. Here he
dealt with three Assyrian fortresses: one, the weakest, he attacked
and took by force, while the garrisons of the other two, what with the
eloquence of Gadatas and the terror inspired by Cyrus, were persuaded
to surrender.

[C.5] And now that his expedition was completed, Cyrus sent to
Cyaxares and urged him to come to the camp in order that they might
decide best how to use the forts which they had taken, and perhaps
Cyaxares, after reviewing the army, would advise him what the next
move ought to be, or, Cyrus added to the messenger, "if he bids me,
say I will come to him and take up my encampment there." [2] So the
emissary went off with the message, and meanwhile Cyrus gave orders
that the Assyrian tent chosen for Cyaxares should be furnished as
splendidly as possible, and the woman brought to her apartment there,
and the two singing-girls also, whom they had set aside for him.

[3] And while they were busied with these things the envoy went to
Cyaxares and delivered his message, and Cyaxares listened and decided
it was best for Cyrus and his men to stay on the frontier. The
Persians whom Cyrus had sent for had already arrived, forty thousand
bowmen and targeteers. [4] To watch these eating up the land was bad
enough, and Cyaxares thought he would rather be quit of one horde
before he received another. On his side the officer in command of the
Persian levy, following the instructions from Cyrus, asked Cyaxares if
he had any need of the men, and Cyaxares said he had not. Thereupon,
and hearing that Cyrus had arrived, the Persian put himself at the
head of his troops and went off at once to join him. [5] Cyaxares
himself waited till the next day and then set out with the Median
troopers who had stayed behind. And when Cyrus knew of his approach he
took his Persian cavalry, who were now a large body of men, and all
the Medes, Hyrcanians, and Armenians, and the best-mounted and best-
armed among the rest, and so went out to meet Cyaxares and show the
power he had won. [6] But when Cyaxares saw so large a following of
gallant gentlemen with Cyrus, and with himself so small and mean a
retinue, it seemed to him an insult, and mortification filled his
heart. And when Cyrus sprang from his horse and came up to give him
the kiss of greeting, Cyaxares, though he dismounted, turned away his
head and gave him no kiss, while the tears came into his eyes. [7]
Whereupon Cyrus told the others to stand aside and rest, and then he
took Cyaxares by the hand and led him apart under a grove of palm-
trees, and bade the attendants spread Median carpets for them, and
made Cyaxares sit down, and then, seating himself beside him, he said:

[8] "Uncle of mine, tell me, in heaven's name, I implore you, why are
you angry with me? What bitter sight have you seen to make you feel
such bitterness?"

And then Cyaxares answered:

"Listen, Cyrus; I have been reputed royal and of royal lineage as far
back as the memory of man can go; my father was a king and a king I
myself was thought to be; and now I see myself riding here, meanly and
miserably attended, while you come before me in splendour and
magnificence, followed by the retinue that once was mine and all your
other forces. [9] That would be bitter enough, methinks, from the hand
of an enemy, but--O gods above us!--how much more bitter at the hands
of those from whom we least deserve it! Far rather would I be
swallowed in the earth than live to be seen so low, aye, and to see my
own kinsfolk turn against me and make a mock of me. And well I know,"
said he, "that not only you but my own slaves are now stronger and
greater than myself: they come out equipt to do me far more mischief
than ever I could repay."

[10] But here he stopped, overcome by a passion of weeping, so much so
that for very pity Cyrus' own eyes filled with tears. There was
silence between them for a while, and then Cyrus said:

"Nay, Cyaxares, what you say is not true, and what you think is not
right, if you imagine that because I am here, your Medes have been
equipt to do you any harm. [11] I do not wonder that you are pained,
and I will not ask if you have cause or not for your anger against
them: you will ill brook apologies for them from me. Only it seems to
me a grievous error in a ruler to quarrel with all his subjects at
once. Widespread terror must needs be followed by widespread hate:
anger with all creates unity among all. [12] It was for this reason,
take my word for it, that I would not send them back to you without
myself, fearing that your wrath might be the cause of what would
injure all of us. Through my presence here and by the blessing of
heaven, all is safe for you: but that you should regard yourself as
wronged by me,--I cannot but feel it bitter, when I am doing all in my
power to help my friends, to be accused of plotting against them. [13]
However," he continued, "let us not accuse each other in this useless
way; if possible, let us see exactly in what I have offended. And as
between friend and friend, I will lay down the only rule that is just
and fair: if I can be shown to have done you harm, I will confess I am
to blame, but if it appears that I have never injured you, not even in
thought, will you not acquit me of all injustice towards you?"

"Needs must I," answered Cyaxares.

[14] "And if I can show that I have done you service, and been zealous
in your cause to the utmost of my power, may I not claim, instead of
rebuke, some little meed of praise?"

"That were only fair," said Cyaxares.

[15] "Then," said Cyrus, "let us go through all I have done, point by
point, and see what is good in it and what is evil. [16] Let us begin
from the time when I assumed my generalship, if that is early enough.
I think I am right in saying that it was because you saw your enemies
gathering together against you, and ready to sweep over your land and
you, that you sent to Persia asking for help, and to me in private,
praying me to come, if I could, myself, at the head of any forces they
might send. Was I not obedient to your word? Did I not come myself
with the best and bravest I could bring?"

[17] "You did indeed," answered Cyaxares.

"Tell me, then, before we go further, did you see any wrong in this?
Was it not rather a service and a kindly act?" "Certainly," said
Cyaxares, "so far as that went, I saw nothing but kindliness." [18]
"Well, after the enemy had come, and we had to fight the matter out,
did you ever see me shrink from toil or try to escape from danger?"
"That I never did," said Cyaxares, "quite the contrary."

[19] "And afterwards, when, through the help of heaven, victory was
ours, and the enemy retreated, and I implored you to let us pursue
them together, take vengeance on them together, win together the
fruits of any gallant exploit we might achieve, can you accuse me then
of self-seeking or self-aggrandisement?"

[20] But at that Cyaxares was silent. Then Cyrus spoke again. "If you
would rather not reply to that, tell me if you thought yourself
injured because, when you considered pursuit unsafe, I relieved you of
the risk, and only begged you to lend me some of your cavalry? If my
offence lay in asking for that, when I had already offered to work
with you, side by side, you must prove it to me; and it will need some
eloquence."

[21] He paused, but Cyaxares still kept silence. "Nay," said Cyrus,
"if you will not answer that either, tell me at least if my offence
lay in what followed, when you said that you did not care to stop your
Medes in their merry-making and drive them out into danger, do you
think it was wrong in me, without waiting to quarrel on that score, to
ask you for what I knew was the lightest boon you could grant and the
lightest command you could lay on your soldiers? For I only asked that
he who wished it might be allowed to follow me. [22] And thus, when I
had won your permission, I had won nothing, unless I could win them
too. Therefore I went and tried persuasion, and some listened to me,
and with these I set off on my march, holding my commission from your
own self. So that, if you look on this act as blameworthy, it would
seem that not even the acceptance of your own gifts can be free from
blame. [23] It was thus we started, and after we had gone, was there,
I ask you, a single deed of mine that was not done in the light of
day? Has not the enemy's camp been taken? Have not hundreds of your
assailants fallen? And hundreds been deprived of their horses and
their arms? Is not the spoiler spoiled? The cattle and the goods of
those who harried your land are now in the hands of your friends, they
are brought to you, or to your subjects. [24] And, above all and
beyond all, you see your own country growing great and powerful and
the land of your enemy brought low. Strongholds of his are in your
power, and your own that were torn from you in other days by the
Syrian domination are now restored to you again. I cannot say I should
be glad to learn that any of these things can be bad for you, or short
of good, but I am ready to listen, if so it is. [25] Speak, tell me
your judgment of it all."

Then Cyrus paused, and Cyaxares made answer:

"To call what you have done evil, Cyrus, is impossible. But your
benefits are of such a kind that the more they multiply upon me, the
heavier burden do they bring. [26] I would far rather," he went on,
"have made your country great by own power than see mine exalted in
this way by you. These deeds of yours are a crown of glory to you; but
they bring dishonour to me. [27] And for the wealth, I would rather
have made largess of it to yourself than receive it at your hands in
the way you give it now. Goods so gotten only leave me the poorer. And
for my subjects--I think I would have suffered less if you had injured
them a little than I suffer now when I see how much they owe you. [28]
Perhaps," he added, "you find it inhuman of me to feel thus, but I
would ask you to forget me and imagine that you are in my place and
see how it would appear to you then. Suppose a friend of yours were to
take care of your dogs, dogs that you bred up to guard yourself and
your house, such care that he made them fonder of him than of
yourself, would you be pleased with him for his attention? [29] Or
take another instance, if that one seems too slight: suppose a friend
of yours were to do so much for your own followers, men you kept to
guard you and to fight for you, that they would rather serve in his
train than yours, would you be grateful to him for his kindness? [30]
Or let me take the tenderest of human ties: suppose a friend of yours
paid court to the wife of your bosom so that in the end he made her
love him more than yourself, would he rejoice your heart by his
courtesy? Far from it, I trow; he who did this, you would say, did you
the greatest wrong in all the world. [31] And now, to come nearest to
my own case, suppose some one paid such attention to your Persians
that they learnt to follow him instead of you, would you reckon that
man your friend? No; but a worse enemy than if he had slain a
thousand. [32] Or again, say you spoke in all friendship to a friend
and bade him take what he wished, and straightway he took all he could
lay hands on and carried it off, and so grew rich with your wealth,
and you were left in utter poverty, could you say that friend was
altogether blameless? [33] And I, Cyrus, I feel that you have treated
me, if not in that way, yet in a way exactly like it. What you say is
true enough: I did allow you to take what you liked and go, and you
took the whole of my power and went, leaving me desolate, and to-day
you bring the spoil you have won with my forces, and lay it so grandly
at my feet--magnificent! And you make my country great through the
help of my own might, while I have no part or lot in the performance,
but must step in at the end, like a woman, to receive your favours,
while in the eyes of all men, not least my faithful subjects yonder,
you are the man, and I--I am not fit to wear a crown. [34] Are these,
I ask you, Cyrus, are these the deeds of a benefactor? Nay, had you
been kind as you are kin, above all else you would have been careful
not to rob me of my dignity and honour. What advantage is it to me for
my lands to be made broad if I myself am dishonoured? When I ruled the
Medes, I ruled them not because I was stronger than all of them, but
because they themselves thought that our race was in all things better
than theirs."

[35] But while he was still speaking Cyrus broke in on his words,
crying:

"Uncle of mine, by the heaven above us, if I have ever shown you any
kindness, be kind to me now. Do not find fault with me any more, wait,
and put me to the test, and learn how I feel towards you, and if you
see that what I have done has really brought you good, then, when I
embrace you, embrace me in return and call me your benefactor, and if
not, you may blame me as you please."

[36] "Perhaps," answered Cyaxares, "you are right. I will do as you
wish."

"Then I may kiss you?" said Cyrus.

"Yes, if it pleases you. "And you will not turn aside as you did just
now?" "No, I will not turn aside." And he kissed him.

[37] And when the Medes saw it and the Persians and all the allies--
for all were watching to see how matters would shape--joy came into
their hearts and gladness lit up their faces. Then Cyrus and Cyaxares
mounted their horses and rode back, and the Medes fell in behind
Cyaxares, at a nod from Cyrus, and behind Cyrus the Persians, and the
others behind them. [38] And when they reached the camp and brought
Cyaxares to the splendid tent, those who were appointed made
everything ready for him, and while he was waiting for the banquet his
Medes presented themselves, some of their own accord, it is true, but
most were sent by Cyrus. [39] And they brought him gifts; one came
with a beautiful cup-bearer, another with an admirable cook, a third
with a baker, a fourth with a musician, while others brought cups and
goblets and beautiful apparel; almost every one gave something out of
the spoils they had won. [40] So that the mood of Cyaxares changed,
and he seemed to see that Cyrus had not stolen his subjects from him,
and that they made no less account of him than they used to do.

[41] Now when the hour came for the banquet, Cyaxares sent to Cyrus
and begged him to share it: it was so long, he said, since they had
met. But Cyrus answered, "Bid me not to the feast, good uncle. Do you
not see that all these soldiers of ours have been raised by us to the
pitch of expectation? And it were ill on my part if I seemed to
neglect them for the sake of my private pleasure. If soldiers feel
themselves neglected even the good become faint-hearted, and the bad
grow insolent. [42] With yourself it is different, you have come a
long journey and you must fall to without delay, and if your subjects
do you honour, welcome them and give them good cheer, that there may
be confidence between you and them, but I must go and attend to the
matters of which I speak. [43] Early to-morrow morning," he added,
"our chief officers will present themselves at your gate to hear from
you what you think our next step ought to be. You will tell us whether
we ought to pursue the campaign further or whether the time has now
come to disband our army."

[44] Thereupon Cyaxares betook himself to the banquet and Cyrus called
a council of his friends, the shrewdest and the best fitted to act
with him, and spoke to them as follows:

"My friends, thanks to the gods, our first prayers are granted.
Wherever we set foot now we are the masters of the country: we see our
enemies brought low and ourselves increasing day by day in numbers and
in strength. [45] And if only our present allies would consent to stay
with us a little longer, our achievements could be greater still,
whether force were needed or persuasion. Now it must be your work as
much as mine to make as many of them as possible willing and anxious
to remain. [46] Remember that, just as the soldier who overthrows the
greatest number in the day of battle is held to be the bravest, so the
speaker, when the time has come for persuasion, who brings most men to
his side will be thought the most eloquent, the best orator and the
ablest man of action. [47] Do not, however, prepare your speeches as
though we asked you to give a rhetorical display: remember that those
whom you convince will show it well enough by what they do. [48] I
leave you then," he added, "to the careful study of your parts: mine
is to see, so far as in me lies, that our troops are provided with all
they need, before we hold the council of war."


NOTES

C.1. Cyrus' generosity: he is not cold, not incapable of soft
pleasure, but too pre-occupied with greater things. On the whole, if a
hedonist, this type of man, a hedonist that = a stoic (cf. Socrates,
H. Sidgwick, also J. P.).

C1.4, init. Well told: we feel the character of Araspas at once, as
soon as he opens his lips.

C1.4, med. An Eastern picture. She is one of the Bible women, as
Gadatas and Gobryas are brothers of Barzillai; she is sister of Ruth
or Susanna or Judith or Bathsheba. Perhaps she is nobler than any of
them. She is also the sister of the Greek tragedy women, Antigone,
Alcestis; especially Euripidean is she: no doubt she is sister to the
great women of all lands.

C1.10 ff. Xenophon, Moralist. Cf. /Memorabilia/ for a similar
philosophical difficulty about the will and knowledge. And for this
raising of ethical problems in an artistic setting of narrative, cf.
Lyly. I see a certain resemblance between the times and the writers'
minds. /Vide/ J. A. Symonds on the predecessors of Shakespeare.
Araspas' point is that these scamps have only themselves to blame,
being {akrateis}, and then they turn round and accuse love. (We are
thrown back on the origin of {akrasia}: /vide Memorabilia/ [e.g. I.
ii. v.; IV. v.] for such answer as we can get to that question.)
Whereas the {kaloi kagathoi} desire strongly but can curb their
desires.

C1.13. Shows a confidence in the healthy action of the will. When
Araspas himself is caught later on he develops the theory of a double
self, a higher and a lower (so hgd., and so, I think, Xenophon and
Socrates. /Vide Memorabilia/).

C1.16, fin. Cyrus || Socrates, his prototype here.

C1.18. Very natural and beautiful. Xenophon sympathetic with such a
beautiful humanity. The woman's nature brought out by these touches.
Xenophon, Dramatist: the moral problem is subordinate, that is to say,
is made to grow out of the dramatic action and characterisation.

C1.20. Notice the absolutely fair and warrantable diplomatic advantage
given to the archic man: each step he takes opens up new avenues of
progress. Herein is fulfilled "to him who hath shall be given," but
Cyrus plays his part also, he has the wisdom of serpents with the
gentleness of doves.

C1.21. This is the true rhetoric, the right road to persuasiveness, to
be absolutely frank.

C1.24. The desire to be ruled by the archic man, which the archomenoi
--i.e. all men--feel, is thus manifest. Notice again how the Mede's
own character is maintained: he speaks as he felt then.

C2.8. The bridegroom will be found to be Hystaspas; but we have no
suspicion as yet, without looking on.

C2.9. In this interview Cyrus' character still further developed. /Ex
ore Cyri./, Xenophon propounds his theory of the latent virtue in man,
which only needs an opportunity to burst forth, but, this lacking,
remains unrevealed. Now it is a great godsend to get such a chance. It
is thoroughly Hellenic, or Xenophon-Socratic, this feeling, "Give me a
chance to show my virtue." (But has Cyrus a touch of superhuman
conscious rectitude?)

C2.12. The same thought again: it is full of delicacy and spiritual
discernment: the more one ponders it the more one feels that.

C2.12, fin. For Hellenic or Xenophontine or old-world theory of the
misfortunes which befall the virtuous, /vide/ Homer, /vide/ Book of
Job (Satan), /vide/ Tragedians.

C2.15. Cf. the /Economist/ for praise of rural simplicity. It is
Xenophon /ipsissimus/.

C2.17. Whose bad manners is Xenophon thinking of? Thebans'?

C2.20, fin. A very noble sentence. The man who utters it and the
people whose heart and mind it emanates from must be of a high order;
and in the /Memorabilia/ Socrates has this highest praise, that he
studied to make himself and /all others also/ as good as possible.

C2.21. Notice the practical answer of Cyrus to this panegyric (cf. J.
P.).

C2.32. Prolix, Xenophontic.

C3.6 ff. Here also I feel the mind of Xenophon shimmering under
various lights. The /Cyropaedia/ is shot with Orientalism. Homeric
Epicism--antique Hellenism and modern Hellenism are both there.
Spartan simplicity and Eastern quaintness both say their say. In this
passage the biblical element seems almost audible.

C3.7. This is in the grand style, Oriental, dilatory, ponderous,
savouring of times when battles were affairs of private arrangement
between monarchs and hedged about by all the punctilios of an affair
of honour.

C3.12. N.B.--The archic man shows a very ready wit and inventiveness
in the great art of "grab" in war, though as he said to his father he
was "a late learner" in such matters. Cf. in modern times the duties
of a detective or some such disagreeable office. G. O. Trevelyan as
Irish secretary. Interesting for /war ethics/ in the abstract, and for
Xenophon's view, which is probably Hellenic. Cyrus now has the
opportunity of carrying out the selfish decalogue, the topsy-turvy
morality set forth in I. C.6, C.26 ff.

C3.13. Cf. Old Testament for the sort of subterfuges and preparations,
e.g. the Gibeonites.

C3.15. The archic man has no time. Cyrus {ou skholazei}. Cf. J. P. It
comes from energy combined with high gifts of organisation, economic,
architectonic.

C3.19. Nice, I think, this contrasting of spiritual and natural
productiveness.

C3.32. Here is the rule of conduct clearly expressed, nor do I see how
a military age could frame for itself any other. Christianity only
emerged /sub pace Romana/, which for fraternal brotherhood was the
fullness of time; and even in the commercial age the nations tumble
back practically into the old system.

C3.36 ff. An army on forced march: are there any novelties here?

C3.53. These minute details probably not boring at the time, but
interesting rather, perhaps useful.

C4.13. Cyrus resembles Fawcett in his unselfish self-estimate. Gadatas
is like the British public, or hgd.

C4.16. Here we feel that the Assyrian is not a mere weakling: he can
play his part well enough if he gets a good chance. It needs an Archic
and Strategic Man to overpower him.

C4.17. ANCIENT and MODERN parallelism in treatment of wounded.

C4.24. Hellenic war ethics: non-combatant tillers of the soil to be
let alone. Is this a novelty? If not, what is the prototype? Did the
modern rights of non-combatants so originate?

C4.27, fin. A touch which gives the impression of real history: that
is the art of it.

C4.34. Almost autobiographical: the advantage of having a country seat
in the neighbourhood of a big town. Here we feel the MODERNISM of
XENOPHON. The passage which Stevenson chose for the motto to his
/Silverado Squatters/ would suit Xenophon very well (Cicero, De Off.
I. xx.). Xenophon || Alfred Tennyson. [Mr. Dakyns used the geometric
sign || to indicate parallelism of any sort. The passage from Cicero
might be translated thus: "Some have lived in the country, content
with the happiness of home. These men have enjoyed all that kings
could claim, needing nothing, under the dominion of no man,
untrammelled and in freedom; for the free man lives as he chooses."]

C4.36. The wicked man as conceived in Hellenico-Xenophontine fashion,
charged with the spirit of meanness, envy, and hatred, which cannot
brook the existence of another better than itself.

C4.38. A nice touch: we learn to know Gadatas and Xenophon also, and
the Hellenic mind.

C5.10. Pathos well drawn: /vide/ Richard II. and Bolingbroke.
Euripidean quality.

C5.12. The archic man has got so far he can play the part of
intercessor between Cyaxares and his Medes. The discussion involves
the whole difficulty of suppression ("he must increase, but I must
decrease" is one solution, not touched here).

C5.34. Perhaps this is the very point which Xenophon, Philosopher,
wishes to bring out, the pseudo-archic man and the archic man
contrasted, but Xenophon, lover of man and artist, draws the situation
admirably and truthfully without any doctrinal purpose. It is
{anthropinon} human essentially, this jealousy and humiliation of
spirit.

C5.35. Cyrus' tone of voice and manner must have some compelling charm
in them: the dialectic debate is not pursued, but by a word and look
the archic man wins his way.

C5.36. Oriental and antique Hellenic, also /modern/, formalities. I
can imagine some of those crowned heads, emperors of Germany and
Austria, going through similar ceremonies, walking arm-in-arm, kissing
on both cheeks fraternally, etc.

C5.39-40. This reveals the incorrigible weakness of Cyaxares. He can
never hold his own against the archic man. As a matter of philosophic
"historising," probably Xenophon conceives the Median element as the
corrupting and sapping one in the Persian empire (/vide/ Epilogue),
only he to some extent justifies and excuses Cyrus in his imitations
of it. That is a difficulty.

C5.41. The archic man shows self-command again: his energy somewhat
relieves ignobler actors of responsibility and so far saps their
wills. His up-and-doingness a foil to their indolence.



BOOK VI

[C.1] So the day ended, and they supped and went to rest. But early
the next morning all the allies flocked to Cyaxares' gates, and while
Cyaxares dressed and adorned himself, hearing that a great multitude
were waiting, Cyrus gave audience to the suitors his own friends had
brought. First came the Cadousians, imploring him to stay, and then
the Hyrcanians, and after them the Sakians, and then some one
presented Gobryas, and Hystaspas brought in Gadatas the eunuch, whose
entreaty was still the same. [2] At that Cyrus, who knew already that
for many a day Gadatas had been half-dead with fear lest the army
should be disbanded, laughed outright and said, "Ah, Gadatas, you
cannot conceal it: you have been bribed by my friend Hystaspas to take
this view."

[3] But Gadatas lifted up his hands to heaven and swore most solemnly
that Hystaspas had not influenced him.

"Nay," said he, "it is because I know myself that, if you depart, I am
ruined utterly. And therefore it was that I took it upon me to speak
with Hystaspas myself, and ask him if he knew what was in your mind
about the disbanding of the army."

[4] And Cyrus said, "It would be unjust then, I suppose, to lay the
blame on Hystaspas." "Yes, Cyrus, most unjust," said Hystaspas, "for I
only said to Gadatas that it would be impossible for you to carry on
the campaign, as your father wanted you home, and had sent for you."

[5] "What?" cried Cyrus, "you dared to let that be known whether I
wished it or not?"

"Certainly I did," he answered, "for I can see that you are mad to be
home in Persia, the cynosure of every eye, telling your father how you
wrought this and accomplished that."

"Well," said Cyrus, "are you not longing to go home yourself?"

"No," said the other. "I am not. Nor have I any intention of going:
here I shall stay and be general-in-chief until I make our friend
Gadatas the lord and the Assyrian his slave."

[6] Thus half in jest and half in earnest they played with one
another, and meanwhile Cyaxares had finished adorning himself and came
forth in great splendour and solemnity, and sat down on a Median
throne. And when all were assembled and silence was proclaimed,
Cyaxares said:

"My friends and allies, perhaps, since I am present and older than
Cyrus, it is suitable that I should address you first. It appears to
me that the moment has come to discuss one question before all others,
the question whether we ought to go on with the campaign or disband
the army. Be pleased," he added, "to state your opinions on the
matter."

[7] Then the leader of the Hyrcanians stood up at once and said:

"Friends and allies, I hardly think that words are needed when facts
themselves show us the path to take. All of us know that while we
stand together we give our enemy more trouble than we get: but when we
stood alone it was they who dealt with us as they liked best and we
liked least."

[8] Then the Cadousian followed.

"The less we talk," said he, "about breaking-up and going home
separately the better; separation has done us anything but good, it
seems to me, even on the march. My men and I, at any rate, very soon
paid the penalty for private excursions; as I dare say you have not
forgotten."

[9] Upon that Artabazus rode, the Mede who had claimed kinship with
Cyrus in the old days.

"Cyaxares," said he, "in one respect I differ from those who have
spoken before me: they think we should stay here in order to go on
with the campaign, but I think I am always on campaign at home. [10] I
was for ever out on some expedition or other, because our people were
being harried, or our fortresses threatened, and a world of trouble I
had, what with fears within and fighting without, and all too at my
own expense. As it is now, I occupy the enemy's forts, my fear of them
is gone, I make good cheer on their own good things, and I drink their
own good wine. Since home means fighting and service here means
feasting, I am not in favour myself," said he, "of breaking up the
company."

[11] Then Gobryas spoke.

"Friends," said he, "I have trusted Cyrus' word and had no fault to
find with him: what he promises that he performs: but if he leaves the
country now, the Assyrian will be reprieved, he will never be punished
for the wrongs he tried to inflict on you and did inflict on me: I
shall be punished instead, because I have been your friend."

[12] At that Cyrus rose at last and said:

"Gentlemen, I am well aware that the disbanding of our forces must
mean the decrease of our power and the increase of theirs. If some of
them have given up their weapons, they will soon procure others; if
some have lost their horses, the loss will soon be made good; if some
have fallen in battle, others, younger and stronger, will take their
place. We need not be surprised if they are soon in a condition to
cause us trouble again. [13] Why, then, did I ask Cyaxares to put the
question to debate? Because, I answer, I am afraid of the future. I
see opponents against us whom we cannot fight, if we conduct the
campaign as we are doing now. [14] Winter is advancing against us, and
though we may have shelter for ourselves we have nothing, heaven
knows, for our horses and our servants and the great mass of our
soldiery, without whom we cannot even think of a campaign. As to
provisions, up to the limits of our advance and because of that
advance they have been exhausted; and beyond that line, owing to the
terror we inspire, the inhabitants will have stowed their supplies
away in strong places where they can enjoy them and we cannot get
them. [15] Where is the warrior, stout of heart and strong of will,
who can wage war with cold and hunger? If our style of soldiering is
to be only what it has been, I say we ought to disband at once of our
own accord, and not wait to be driven from the field against our will
by sheer lack of means. If we do wish to go forward, this is what we
must do: we must detach from the enemy all the fortresses we can and
secure all we can for our own: if this is done, the larger supply will
be in the hands of those who can stow away the larger store, and the
weaker will suffer siege. [16] At present we are like mariners on the
ocean: they may sail on for ever, but the seas they have crossed are
no more theirs than those that are still unsailed. But if we hold the
fortresses, the enemy will find they are living in a hostile land,
while we have halcyon weather. [17] Some of you may dread the thought
of garrison duty far from home; if so, dispel your doubts. We
Persians, who must, as it is, be exiles for the time, will undertake
the positions that are nearest to the foe, while it will be for you to
occupy the land on the marches between Assyria and yourselves and put
it under tillage. [18] For, if we can hold his inner line, your peace
will not be disturbed in the outlying parts: he will scarcely neglect
the danger at his door to attack you out in the distance."

[19] At this the whole assembly rose to express their eagerness and
assent, and Cyaxares stood up with them. And both Gadatas and Gobryas
offered to fortify a post if the allies wished, and thus provide two
cities of refuge to start with.

[20] Finally Cyrus, thus assured of the general consent to his
proposals, said, "If we really wish to carry out what we have set
ourselves, we must prepare battering-rams and siege engines, and get
together mechanics and builders for our own castles." [21] Thereupon
Cyaxares at once undertook to provide an engine at his own expense,
Gadatas and Gobryas made themselves responsible for a second, Tigranes
for a third, and Cyrus himself promised he would try to furnish two.
[22] That done, every one set to work to find engineers and artisans
and to collect material for the machines; and superintendents were
appointed from those best qualified for the work.

[23] Now Cyrus was aware that all this would take some time, and
therefore he encamped his troops in the healthiest spot he could find
and the easiest to supply, strengthening, wherever necessary, the
natural defences of the place, so that the detachment left in charge
for the time should always be in complete security, even though he
might be absent himself with the main body of his force. [24] Nor was
this all; he questioned those who knew the country best, and, learning
where he would be rewarded for his pains, he would lead his men out to
forage, and thus procure as large supplies as possible, keep his
soldiers in the best of health and strength, and fix their drill in
their minds.

[25] So Cyrus spent his days, and meanwhile the deserters from Babylon
and the prisoners who were captured all told the same story: they said
that the king had gone off to Lydia, taking with him store of gold and
silver, and riches and treasures of every kind. [26] The mass of the
soldiers were convinced that he was storing his goods away from fear,
but Cyrus knew that he must have gone to raise, if possible, an
opponent who could face them, and therefore he pushed his preparations
forward vigorously, feeling that another battle must be fought. He
filled up the Persian cavalry to its full complement, getting the
horses partly from the prisoners, partly from his own friends. There
were two gifts he would never refuse, horses and good weapons. [27] He
also procured chariots, taking them from the enemy or wherever he
could find them. The old Trojan type of charioteering, still in use to
this day among the Cyrenaeans, he abolished; before his time the
Medes, the Syrians, the Arabians, and all Asiatics generally, used
their chariots in the same way as the Cyrenaeans do now. [28] The
fault of the system to his mind was that the very flower of the army,
if the picked men were in the chariots, could only act at long range
and so contribute little after all to the victory. Three hundred
chariots meant twelve hundred horses and three hundred fighting-men,
besides the charioteers, who would naturally be men above the common,
in whom the warriors could place confidence: and that meant another
three hundred debarred from injuring the enemy in any kind of way.
[29] Such was the system he abolished in favour of the war-chariot
proper, with strong wheels to resist the shock of collision, and long
axles, on the principle that a broad base is the firmer, while the
driver's seat was changed into what might be called a turret, stoutly
built of timber and reaching up to the elbow, leaving the driver room
to manage the horses above the rim. The drivers themselves were all
fully armed, only their eyes uncovered. [30] He had iron scythes about
two feet long attached to the axles on either side, and others, under
the tree, pointing to the ground, for use in a charge. Such was the
type of chariot invented by Cyrus, and it is still in use to-day among
the subjects of the Great King. Beside the chariots he had a large
number of camels, collected from his friends or captured from the
enemy. [31] Moreover, he decided to send a spy into Lydia to ascertain
the movements of the king, and he thought that the right man for this
purpose was Araspas, the officer in charge of the fair lady from Susa.
Matters had gone ill with Araspas: he had fallen passionately in love
with his prisoner, and been led to entreat her to be his paramour.
[32] She had refused, faithful to her husband who was far away, for
she loved him dearly, but she forbore to accuse Araspas to Cyrus,
being unwilling to set friend at strife with friend. [33] But when at
length Araspas, thinking it would help him in his desires, began to
threaten her, saying that if she would not yield he would have his
will of her by force, then in her dread of violence she could keep the
matter hid no longer, and she sent her eunuch to Cyrus with orders to
tell him everything. [34] And when Cyrus heard it he smiled over the
man who had boasted that he was superior to love, and sent Artabazus
back with the eunuch to tell Araspas that he must use no violence
against such a woman, but if he could persuade her, he might do so.
[35] But Artabazus, when he saw Araspas, rebuked him sternly, saying
that the woman was a sacred trust, and his conduct disgraceful,
impious, and wicked, till Araspas burst into tears of misery and
shame, and was half dead at the thought of what Cyrus would do. [36]
Learning this, Cyrus sent for him, saw him alone, and said to him face
to face:

"Araspas, I know that you are afraid of me and in an agony of shame.
Be comforted; we are told that the gods themselves are made subject to
desire, and I could tell you what love has forced some men to undergo,
men who seemed most lofty and most wise. Did I not pass sentence on
myself, when I confessed I was too weak to consort with loveliness and
remain unmoved? Indeed it is I who am most to blame in the matter, for
I shut you up myself with this irresistible power."

[37] But Araspas broke in on his words:

"Ah, Cyrus, you are ever the same, gentle and compassionate to human
weaknesses. But all the rest of the world has no pity on me; they
drown me in wretchedness. As soon as the tattlers got wind of my
misfortune, all my enemies exulted, and my friends came to me,
advising me to make away with myself for fear of you, because my
iniquity was so great."

[38] Then Cyrus said, "Now listen: this opinion about you may be the
means by which you can do me a great kindness and your comrades a
great service." "Oh, that it were possible!" said Araspas, "for me
ever to be of service to you!" [39] "Well," said the other, "if you
went to the enemy, feigning that you had fled from me, I think they
would believe you." "I am sure they would," said Araspas, "I know even
my own friends would think that of course I ran away." [40] "Then you
will come back to us," Cyrus went on, "with full information about the
enemy's affairs; for, if I am right in my expectation, they will trust
you and let you see all their plans, so that you need miss nothing of
what we wish to know." "I will be off this moment," said Araspas; "it
will be my best credential to have it thought I was just in time to
escape punishment from you."

[41] "Then you can really bring yourself to leave the beautiful
Pantheia?"

"Yes, Cyrus," he answered, "I can; for I see now that we have two
souls. This is the lesson of philosophy that I have learnt from the
wicked sophist Love. If we had but a single soul, how could she be at
once evil and good? How could she be enamoured at once of nobleness
and baseness, or at once desire and not desire one deed and the same?
No, it is clear that we have two souls, and when the beautiful soul
prevails, all fair things are wrought, and when the evil soul has the
mastery, she lays her hand to shame and wickedness. But to-day my good
soul conquers, because she has you to help her."

[42] "Well," said Cyrus, "if you have decided on going, it is thus you
had better go. Thus you will win their confidence, and then you must
tell them what we are doing, but in such a way as to hinder their own
designs. It would hinder them, for example, if you said that we were
preparing an attack on their territory at a point not yet decided; for
this would check the concentration of their forces, each leader being
most concerned for the safety of his own home. [43] Stay with them,"
he added, "till the last moment possible: what they do when they are
close at hand is just what is most important for us to know. Advise
them how to dispose their forces in the way that really seems the
best, for then, after you are gone and although it may be known that
you are aware of their order, they will be forced to keep to it, they
will not dare to change it, and should they do so at the last moment
they will be thrown into confusion."

[44] Thereupon Araspas took his leave, called together his trustiest
attendants, said what he thought necessary for the occasion, and
departed.

[45] Now Pantheia, when she heard that Araspas had fled, sent a
messenger to Cyrus, saying:

"Grieve not, Cyrus, that Araspas has gone to join the foe: I will
bring you a far trustier friend than he, if you will let me send for
my husband, and I know he will bring with him all the power that he
has. It is true that the old king was my husband's friend, but he who
reigns now tried to tear us two asunder, and my husband knows him for
a tyrant and a miscreant, and would gladly be quit of him and take
service with such a man as you."

[46] When Cyrus heard that, he bade Pantheia send word to her husband,
and she did so. Now when Abradatas saw the tokens from his wife, and
learnt how matters stood, he was full of joy, and set out for Cyrus'
camp immediately, with a thousand horsemen in his train. And when he
came to the Persian outposts he sent to Cyrus saying who he was, and
Cyrus gave orders that he should be taken to Pantheia forthwith. [47]
So husband and wife met again after hope had well-nigh vanished, and
were in each other's arms once more. And then Pantheia spoke of Cyrus,
his nobleness, his honour, and the compassion he had shown her, and
Abradatas cried:

"Tell me, tell me, how can I repay him all I owe him in your name and
mine!" And she answered:

"So deal with him, my husband, as he has dealt with you."

[48] And thus Abradatas went to Cyrus, and took him by the hand, and
said:

"Cyrus, in return for the kindness you have shown us, I can say no
more than this: I give myself to you, I will be your friend, your
servant, and your ally: whatever you desire, I will help you to win,
your fellow-worker always, so far as in me lies."

[49] Then Cyrus answered:

"And I will take your gift: but for the moment you must leave me, and
sup with your wife: another day you will let me play the host, and
give you lodging with your friends and mine."

[50] Afterwards Abradatas perceived how much Cyrus had at heart the
scythe-bearing chariots and the cavalry and the war-horses with their
armour, and he resolved to equip a hundred chariots for him out of his
own cavalry force. [51] These he proposed to lead himself in a chariot
of his own, four-poled and drawn by eight horses, all the eight
protected by chest-plates of bronze. [52] So Abradatas set to work,
and this four-poled chariot of his gave Cyrus the idea of making a car
with eight poles, drawn by eight yoke of oxen, to carry the lowest
compartment of the battering engines, which stood, with its wheels,
about twenty-seven feet from the ground. [53] Cyrus felt that he had a
series of such towers brought into the field at a fair pace they would
be of immense service to him, and inflict as much damage on the enemy.
The towers were built with galleries and parapets, and each of them
could carry twenty men. [54] When the whole was put together he tested
it and found that the eight yoke of oxen could draw the whole tower
with the men more easily than one yoke by itself could manage the
ordinary weight of baggage, which came to about five-and-twenty
talents apiece, whereas the tower, build of planks about as thick as
the boards for a stage, weighed less than fifteen for each yoke. [55]
Thus, having satisfied himself that the attempt was perfectly
possible, he arranged to take the towers into action, believing that
in war selfishness meant salvation, justice, and happiness.

[C.2] About this time ambassadors came to Cyrus from India with gifts
of courtesy and a message from their king, saying:

"I send you greeting, Cyrus, and I rejoice that you told me of your
needs. I desire to be your friend and I offer you gifts; and if you
have need of anything more, I bid you say the word, and it shall be
yours. I have told my men to do whatever you command."

[2] Then Cyrus answered:

"This, then, is my bidding: the rest of you shall stay where you have
pitched your tents; you shall guard your treasures and live as you
choose: but three of you shall go to the enemy and make believe that
you have come to him about an alliance with your king, and thus you
shall learn how matters stand, and all they say and all they do, and
so bring me word again with speed. And if you serve me well in this, I
shall owe you even more than I could owe you for these gifts. There
are some spies who are no better than slaves, and have no skill to
find out anything more than is known already, but there are men of
another sort, men of your stamp, who can discover plans that are not
yet disclosed."

[3] The Indians listened gladly, and for the moment made themselves at
home as the guests of Cyrus: but the next day they got ready and set
off on their journey, promising to find out as much as they could of
the enemy's secrets and bring him word again with all possible speed.

[4] Meanwhile Cyrus continued his preparations for the war on a
magnificent scale, like one who meant to accomplish no small
achievement. Not only did he carry out all the resolutions of the
allies, but he breathed a spirit of emulation into his own friends and
followers, till each strove to outshine his fellows in arms and
accoutrements, in horsemanship and spearmanship and archery, in
endurance of toil and danger. [5] Cyrus would lead them out to the
chase, and show especial honour to those who distinguished themselves
in any way: he would whet the ambition of the officers by praising all
who did their best to improve their men, and by gratifying them in
every way he could. [6] At every sacrifice and festival he instituted
games and contests in all martial exercises, and lavished prizes on
the victors, till the whole army was filled with enthusiasm and
confidence. [7] By this time Cyrus had almost everything in readiness
for the campaign, except the battering-machines. The Persian cavalry
was made up to its full number of ten thousand men, and the scythed
chariots were complete, a hundred of his own, and a hundred that
Abradatas of Susa had provided. [8] Beside these there were a hundred
of the old Median chariots which Cyrus had persuaded Cyaxares to
remodel on his own type, giving up the Trojan and Lydian style. The
camels were ready also, each animal carrying a couple of mounted
archers.

The bulk of the great army felt almost as though they had already
conquered, and the enemy's power was held of no account.

[9] While matters were thus, the Indians whom Cyrus had sent out
returned with their report. Croesus had been chosen leader and
general-in-chief; a resolution had been passed, calling on all the
allied kings to bring up their entire forces, raise enormous sums for
the war, and spend them in hiring mercenaries where they could and
making presents where they must. [10] Large numbers of Thracians,
armed with the short sword, had already been enrolled, and a body of
Egyptians were coming by sea, amounting--so said the Indians--to
120,000 men, armed with long shields reaching to their feet, huge
spears (such as they carry to this day), and sabres. Beside these, an
army was expected from Cyprus, and there were already on the spot all
the Cilicians, the men of both the Phrygias, of Lycaonia, Paphlagonia,
and Cappadocia, the Arabians, the Phoenicians, and all the Assyrians
under the king of Babylon. Moreover, the Ionians, and Aeolians, and
indeed nearly all the Hellenic colonists on the coast were compelled
to follow in the train of Croesus. [11] Croesus himself had already
sent to Lacedaemon to propose an alliance with the Spartans. The
armament was mustering on the banks of the Pactolus, and they were to
push forward presently to Thymbrara (the place which is still the
mustering-ground for all the Asiatic subjects of the Great King west
of Syria), and orders had been issued to open a market there. This
report agreed with the accounts given by the prisoners, for Cyrus was
always at pains to gave men captured from whom he could get some
information, and he would also send out spies disguised as runaway
slaves.

[12] Such were the tidings, and when the army heard the news there was
much anxiety and concern, as one may well suppose. The men went about
their work with an unusual quietness, their faces clouded over, or
gathered in knots and clusters everywhere, anxiously asking each other
the news and discussing the report. [13] When Cyrus saw that fear was
in the camp, he called a meeting of his generals, and indeed of all
whose dejection might injure the cause and whose confidence assist it.
Moreover, he sent word that any of the attendants, or any of the rank
and file, who wished to hear what he had to say, would be allowed to
come and listen. When they met, he spoke as follows:

[14] "My friends and allies, I make no secret of the reason I have
called you here. It was because I saw that some of you, when the
reports of the enemy reached us, looked like men who were panic-
stricken. But I must say I am astonished that any of you should feel
alarm because the enemy is mustering his forces, and not be reassured
by remembering that our own is far larger than it was when we
conquered him before, and far better provided, under heaven, with all
we need. [15] I ask you how you would have felt, you who are afraid
now, if you had been told that a force exactly like our own was
marching upon us, if you had heard that men who had conquered us
already were coming now, carrying in their hearts the victory they had
won, if you knew that those who made short work then of all our bows
and javelins were advancing again, and others with them, ten thousand
times as many? [16] Suppose you heard that the very men who had routed
our infantry once were coming on now equipt as before, but this time
on horseback, scorning arms and javelins, each man armed with one
stout spear, ready to charge home? [17] Suppose you heard of chariots,
made on a new pattern, not to be kept motionless, standing, as
hitherto, with their backs turned to the foe as if for flight, but
with the horses shielded by armour, and the drivers sheltered by
wooden walls and protected by breastplates and helmets, and the axles
fitted with iron scythes so that they can charge straight into the
ranks of the foe? [18] And suppose you heard that they have camels to
ride on, each one of which would scare a hundred horses, and that they
will bring up towers from which to help their own friends, and
overwhelm us with volleys of darts so that we cannot fight them on
level ground? [19] If this were what you had heard of the enemy, I as
you, once again, you who are now so fearful what would you have done?
You who turn pale when told that Croesus has been chosen commander-in-
chief, Croesus who proved himself so much more cowardly than the
Syrians, that when they were worsted in battle and fled, instead of
helping them, his own allies, he took to his heels himself. [20] We
are told, moreover, that the enemy himself does not feel equal to
facing you alone, he is hiring others to fight for him better than he
could for himself. I can only say, gentlemen, that if any individual
considers our position as I describe it alarming or unfavourable, he
had better leave us. Let him join our opponents, he will do us far
more service there than here."

[21] When Cyrus had ended, Chrysantas the Persian stood up and said:

"Cyrus, you must not wonder if the faces of some were clouded when
they heard the news. The cloud was a sign of annoyance, not of fear.
Just as if," he went on, "a company were expecting breakfast
immediately, and then were told there was some business that must be
got through first, I do not suppose any of them would be particularly
pleased. Here we were, saying to ourselves that our fortunes were
made, and now we are informed there is still something to be done, and
of course our countenances fell, not because we were afraid, but
because we could have wished it all over and done with. [22] However,
since it now appears that Syria is not to be the only prize--though
there is much to be got in Syria, flocks and herds and corn and palm-
trees yielding fruit--but Lydia as well, Lydia the land of wine and
oil and fig-trees, Lydia, to whose shores the sea brings more good
things than eyes can feast on, I say that once we realise this we can
mope no longer, our spirits will rise apace, and we shall hasten to
lay our hands on the Lydian wealth without delay."

So he spoke, and the allies were well pleased at his words and gave
him loud applause.

[23] "Truly, gentlemen," said Cyrus, "as Chrysantas says, I think we
ought to march without delay, if only to be beforehand with our foes,
and reach their magazines before they do themselves; and besides, the
quicker we are, the fewer resources we shall find with them. [24] That
is how I put the matter, but if any one sees a safer or an easier way,
let him instruct us."

But many speakers followed, all urging an immediate march, without one
speech in opposition, and so Cyrus took up the word again and said:

[25] "My friends and allies, God helping us, our hearts, our bodies,
and our weapons have now been long prepared: all that remains is to
get together what we need for ourselves and our animals on a march of
at least twenty days. I reckon that the journey itself must take more
than fifteen, and not a vestige of food shall we find from end to end.
It has all been made away with, partly by ourselves, partly by our
foes, so far as they could. [26] We must collect enough corn, without
which one can neither fight nor live: and as for wine, every man must
carry just so much as will accustom him to drink water: the greater
part of the country will be absolutely devoid of wine, and the largest
supply we could take with us would not hold out. [27] But to avoid too
sudden a change and the sickness that might follow, this is what we
must do. We must begin by taking water with our food: we can do this
without any great change in our habits. [28] For every one who eats
porridge has the oatmeal mixed with water, and every one who eats
bread has the wheat soaked in water, and all boiled meat is prepared
in water. We shall not miss the wine if we drink a little after the
meal is done. [29] Then we must gradually lessen the amount, until we
find that, without knowing it, we have become water-drinkers. Gradual
change enables every creature to go through a complete conversion; and
this is taught us by God, who leads us little by little out of winter
until we can bear the blazing heat of summer, and out of heat back
again into the depths of winter. So should we follow God, and take one
step after another until we reach our goal. [30] What you might spend
on heavy rugs and coverlets spend rather on food: any superfluity
there will not be wasted: and you will not sleep less soundly for lack
of bedclothes; if you do, I give you leave to blame me. But with
clothing the case is different: a man can hardly have too much of that
in sickness or in health. [31] And for seasoning you should take what
is sharp and dry and salted, for such meats are more appetising and
more satisfying. And since we may come into districts as yet unravaged
where we may find growing corn, we ought to take handmills for
grinding: these are the lightest machines for the purpose. [32] Nor
must we forget to supply ourselves with medicines--they are small in
bulk and, if need arises, invaluable. And we ought to have a large
supply of straps--I wonder what is not fastened by a strap to man or
horse? But straps wear out and get broken and then things are at a
standstill unless there are spare ones to be had. [33] Some of you
have learnt to shave spears, so that it would be as well not to forget
a plane, and also to carry a rasp, for the man who sharpens a
spearhead will sharpen his spirit too. He will feel ashamed to whet
the edge and be a coward. And we must take plenty of timber for
chariots and waggons; there is bound to be many a breakdown on the
road. [34] Also we shall need the most necessary tools for repairs,
since smiths and carpenters are not to be found at every turn, but
there are few who cannot patch up a makeshift for the time. Then there
should be a mattock and a shovel apiece for every waggon, and on every
beast of burden a billhook and an axe, always useful to the owner and
sometimes a boon to all. [35] The provisions must be seen to by the
officers of the fighting-line; they must inspect the men under their
command and see that nothing is omitted which any man requires; the
omission would be felt by us all. Those of you who are in command of
the baggage-train will inspect what I have ordered for the animals and
insist upon every man being provided who is not already supplied. [36]
You, gentlemen, who are in command of the road-makers, you have the
lists of the soldiers I have disqualified from serving as javelin-men,
bowmen, or slingers, and you will make the old javelin men march with
axes for felling timber, the bowmen with mattocks, and the slingers
with shovels. They will advance by squads in front of the waggons so
that if there is any road-making to be done you may set to work at
once, and in case of need I may know where to get the men I want. [37]
I mean also to take a corps of smiths, carpenters, and cobblers, men
of military age, provided with the proper tools, to supply any
possible need. These men will not be in the fighting-line, but they
will have a place assigned to them where they can be hired by any one
who likes. [38] If any huckster wishes to follow the army with his
wares, he may do so, but if caught selling anything during the fifteen
days for which provisions have been ordered, he will be deprived of
all his goods: after the fifteen days are done he may sell what he
likes. Any merchant who offers us a well-stocked market will receive
recompense and honour from the allies and myself. [39] And if any one
needs an advance of money for trading, he must send me guarantors who
will undertake that he will march with the army, and then he can draw
on our funds. These are the general orders: and I will ask any of you
who think that anything has been omitted to point it out to me. [40]
You will now go back to your quarters and make your preparations, and
while you do so I will offer sacrifice for our journey and when the
signs are favourable we will give the signal. At that you must present
yourselves, with everything I have ordered, at the appointed place,
under your own officers. [41] And you, gentlemen," said he, turning to
the officers, "when your divisions are all in line, you will come to
me in a body to receive your final orders."

[C.3] With these instructions the army went to make their preparations
while Cyrus offered sacrifice.

As soon as the victims were favourable, he set out with his force.

On the first day they encamped as near by as possible, so that
anything left behind could easily be fetched and any omission readily
supplied. [2] Cyaxares stayed in Media with a third of the Median
troops in order not to leave their own country undefended. Cyrus
himself pushed forward with all possible speed, keeping his cavalry in
the van and constantly sending explorers and scouts ahead to some
look-out. Behind the cavalry came the baggage, and on the plains he
had long strings of waggons and beasts of burden, and the main army
behind them, so that if any of the baggage-train fell back, the
officers who caught them up would see that they did not lose their
places in the march. [3] But where the road was narrower the fighting-
men marched on either side with the baggage in the middle, and in case
of any block it was the business of the soldiers on the spot to attend
to the matter. As a rule, the different regiments would be marching
alongside their own baggage, orders having been given that all members
of the train should advance by regiments unless absolutely prevented.
[4] To help matters the brigadier's own body-servant led the way with
an ensign known to his men, so that each regiment marched together,
the men doing their best to keep up with their comrades. Thus there
was no need to search for each other, everything was to hand, there
was greater security, and the soldiers could get what they wanted more
quickly.

[5] After some days the scouts ahead thought they could see people in
the plain collecting fodder and timber, and then they made out beasts
of burden, some grazing and others already laden, and as they scanned
the distance they felt sure they could distinguish something that was
either smoke rising or clouds of dust; and from all this they
concluded that the enemy's army was not far off. [6] Whereupon their
commander despatched a messenger with the news to Cyrus, who sent back
word that the scouts should stay where they were, on their look-out,
and tell him if they saw anything more, while he ordered a squadron of
cavalry to ride forward, and intercept, if they could, some of the men
on the plain and so discover the actual state of affairs. [7] While
the detachment carried out this order Cyrus halted the rest of his
army to make such dispositions as he thought necessary before coming
to close quarters. His first order was for the troops to take their
breakfast: after breakfast they were to fall in and wait for the word
of command. [8] When breakfast was over he sent for all the officers
from the cavalry, the infantry, and the chariot brigade, and for the
commanders of the battering engines and the baggage train, and they
came to him. [9] Meanwhile the troop of horse had dashed into the
plain, cut off some of the men, and now brought them in captive. The
prisoners, on being questioned by Cyrus, said they belonged to the
camp and had gone out to forage or cut wood and so had passed beyond
their own pickets, for, owing to the size of their army, everything
was scarce.

[10] "How far is your army from here?" asked Cyrus. "About seven
miles," said they. "Was there any talk about us down there?" said he.
"We should think there was," they answered; "it was all over the camp
that you were coming." "Ah," said Cyrus, "I suppose they were glad to
hear we were coming so soon?" (putting this question for his officers
to hear the answer). "That they were not," said the prisoners, "they
were anything but glad; they were miserable." [11] "And what are they
doing now?" asked Cyrus. "Forming their line of battle," answered
they; "yesterday and the day before they did the same."

"And their commander?" said Cyrus, "who is he?" "Croesus himself,"
said they, "and with him a Greek, and also another man, a Mede, who is
said to be a deserter from you."

"Ah," cried Cyrus, "is that so? Most mighty Zeus, may I deal with him
as I wish!"

[12] Then he had the prisoners led away and turned to speak to his
officers, but at this moment another scout appeared, saying that a
large force of cavalry was in the plain. "We think," he added, "that
they are trying to get a sight of our army. For about thirty of them
are riding ahead at a good round pace and they seem to be coming
straight for our little company, perhaps to capture our look-out if
they can, for there are only ten of us there."

[13] At that Cyrus sent off a detachment from his own bodyguard,
bidding them gallop up to the place, unseen by the enemy, and stay
there motionless. "Wait," he said, "until our own ten must leave the
spot and then dash out on the thirty as they come up the hill. And to
prevent any injury from the larger body, do you, Hystaspas," said he,
turning to the latter, "ride out with a thousand horse, and let them
see you suddenly, face to face. But remember not to pursue them out of
sight, come back as soon as you have secured our post. And if any of
your opponents ride up with their right hands raised, welcome them as
friends."

[14] Accordingly Hystaspas went off and got under arms, while the
bodyguard galloped to the spot. But before they reached the scouts,
some one met them with his squires, the man who had been sent out as a
spy, the guardian of the lady from Susa, Araspas himself. [15] When
the news reached Cyrus, he sprang up from his seat, went to meet him
himself, and clasped his hand, but the others, who of course knew
nothing, were utterly dumbfounded, until Cyrus said:

"Gentlemen, the best of our friends has come back to us. It is high
time that all men should know what he has done. It was not through any
baseness, or any weakness, or any fear of me, that he left us; it was
because I sent him to be my messenger, to learn the enemy's doings and
bring us word. [16] Araspas, I have not forgotten what I promised you,
I will repay you, we will all repay you. For, gentlemen, it is only
just that all of you should pay him honour. Good and true I call him
who risked himself for our good, and took upon himself a reproach that
was heavy to bear."

[17] At that all crowded round Araspas and took him by the hand and
made him welcome. Then Cyrus spoke again:

"Enough, my friends, Araspas has news for us, and it is time to hear
it. Tell us your tale, Araspas, keep back nothing of the truth, and do
not make out the power of the enemy less than it really is. It is far
better that we should find it smaller than we looked for rather than
strong beyond our expectations." [18] "Well," began Araspas, "in order
to learn their numbers, I managed to be present at the marshalling of
their troops." "Then you can tell us," said Cyrus, "not only their
numbers but their disposition in the field." "That I can," answered
Araspas, "and also how they propose to fight." "Good," said Cyrus,
"but first let us hear their numbers in brief." [19] "Well," he
answered, "they are drawn up thirty deep, infantry and cavalry alike,
all except the Egyptians, and they cover about five miles; for I was
at great pains," he added, "to find out how much ground they
occupied."

[20] "And the Egyptians?" Cyrus said, "how are they drawn up? I
noticed you said, 'all except the Egyptians.'"

"The Egyptians," he answered, "are drawn up in companies of ten
thousand, under their own officers, a hundred deep, and a hundred
broad: that, they insisted, was their usual formation at home.
Croesus, however, was very loth to let them have their own way in
this: he wished to outflank you as much as possible." "Why?" Cyrus
asked, "what was his object?" "To encircle you, I imagine, with his
wings." "He had better take care," said Cyrus, "or his circle may find
itself in the centre. [21] But now you have told us what we most
needed to know, and you, gentlemen," said he to the officers, "on
leaving this meeting, you will look to your weapons and your harness.
It often happens that the lack of some little thing makes man or horse
or chariot useless. To-morrow morning early, while I am offering
sacrifice, do you take your breakfast and give your steeds their
provender, so that when the moment comes to strike you may not be
found wanting. And then you, Araspas, must hold the right wing in the
position it has now, and the rest of you who command a thousand men
must do the same with your divisions: it is no time to be changing
horses when the race is being run; and you will send word to the
brigadiers and captains under you to draw up the phalanx with each
company two deep." (Now a company consisted of four-and-twenty men.)

[22] Then one of the officers, a captain of ten thousand, said:

"Do you think, Cyrus, that with so shallow a depth we can stand
against their tremendous phalanx?"

"But do you suppose," rejoined he, "that any phalanx so deep that the
rear-ranks cannot close with the enemy could do much either for friend
or foe? [23] I myself," he added, "would rather this heavy infantry of
theirs were drawn up, not a hundred, but ten thousand deep: we should
have all the fewer to fight. Whereas with the depth that I propose, I
believe we shall not waste a man: every part of our army will work
with every other. [24] I will post the javelin-men behind the
cuirassiers, and the archers behind them: it would be absurd to place
in the van troops who admit that they are not made for hand-to-hand
fighting; but with the cuirassiers thrown in front of them they will
stand firm enough, and harass the enemy over the heads of our own men
with their arrows and their darts. And every stroke that falls on the
enemy means so much relief to our friends. [25] In the very rear of
all I will post our reserve. A house is useless without a foundation
as well as a roof, and our phalanx will be no use unless it has a
rear-guard and a van, and both of them good. [26] You," he added,
"will draw up the ranks to suit these orders, and you who command the
targeteers will follow with your companies in the same depth, and you
who command the archers will follow the targeteers. [27] Gentlemen of
the reserve, you will hold your men in the rear, and pass the word
down to your own subordinates to watch the men in front, cheer on
those who do their duty, threaten him who plays the coward, and if any
man show signs of treachery, see that he dies the death. It is for
those in the van to hearten those behind them by word and deed; it is
for you, the reserve, to make the cowards dread you more than the foe.
[28] You know your work, and you will do it. Euphratus," he added,
turning to the officer in command of the artillery, "see that the
waggons with the towers keep as close to the phalanx as possible. [29]
And you, Daouchus, bring up the whole of your baggage-train under
cover of the towers and make your squires punish severely any man who
breaks the line. [30] You, Carouchas, keep the women's carriages close
behind the baggage-train. This long line of followers should give an
impression of vast numbers, allow our own men opportunity for
ambuscades, and force the enemy, if he try to surround us, to widen
his circuit, and the wider he makes it the weaker he will be. [31]
That, then, is your business; and you, gentlemen, Artaozus and
Artagersas, each of you take your thousand foot and guard the baggage.
[32] And you, Pharnouchus and Asiadatas, neither of you must lead your
thousand horse into the fighting-line, you must get them under arms by
themselves behind the carriages: and then come to me with the other
officers as fully-equipt as if you were to be the first to fight. [53]
You, sir, who command the camel-corps will take up your post behind
the carriages and look for further orders to Artagersas. [34] Officers
of the war-chariots, you will draw lots among yourselves, and he on
whom the lot falls will bring his hundred chariots in front of the
fighting-line, while the other two centuries will support our flanks
on the right and left."

[35] Such were the dispositions made by Cyrus; but Abradatas, the lord
of Susa, cried:

"Cyrus, let me, I pray you, volunteer for the post in front."

[36] And Cyrus, struck with admiration for the man, took him by the
hand, and turning to the Persians in command of the other centuries
said:

"Perhaps, gentlemen, you will allow this?"

But they answered that it was hard to resign the post of honour, and
so they all drew lots, and the lot fell on Abradatas, and his post was
face to face with the Egyptians. Then the officers left the council
and carried out the orders given, and took their evening meal and
posted the pickets and went to rest.

[C.4] But early on the morrow Cyrus offered sacrifice, and meanwhile
the rest of the army took their breakfast, and after the libation they
armed themselves, a great and goodly company in bright tunics and
splendid breastplates and shining helmets. All the horses had
frontlets and chest-plates, the chargers had armour on their
shoulders, and the chariot-horses on their flanks; so that the whole
army flashed with bronze, and shone like a flower with scarlet. [2]
The eight-horse chariot of Abradatas was a marvel of beauty and
richness; and just as he was about to put on the linen corslet of his
native land, Pantheia came, bringing him a golden breastplate and a
helmet of gold, and armlets and broad bracelets for his wrists, and a
full flowing purple tunic, and a hyacinth-coloured helmet-plume. All
these she had made for him in secret, taking the measure of his armour
without his knowledge. [3] And when he saw them, he gazed in wonder
and said:

"Dear wife, and did you destroy your own jewels to make this armour
for me?"

But she said, "No, my lord, at least not the richest of them all, for
you shall be my loveliest jewel, when others see you as I see you
now."

As she spoke, she put the armour on him, but then, though she tried to
hide it, the tears rolled down her cheeks.

[4] And truly, when Abradatas was arrayed in the new panoply, he, who
had been fair enough to look upon before, was now a sight of
splendour, noble and beautiful and free, as indeed his nature was. [5]
He took the reins from the charioteer, and was about to set foot on
the car, when Pantheia bade the bystanders withdraw, and said to him,
"My own lord, little need to tell you what you know already, yet this
I say, if any woman loved her husband more than her own soul, I am of
her company. Why should I try to speak? Our lives say more than any
words of mine. [6] And yet, feeling for you what you know, I swear to
you by the love between us that I would rather go down to the grave
beside you after a hero's death than live on with you in shame. I have
thought you worthy of the highest, and believed myself worthy to
follow you. [7] And I bear in mind the great gratitude we owe to
Cyrus, who, when I was his captive, chosen for his spoil, was too
high-minded to treat me as a slave, or dishonour me as a free woman;
he took me and saved me for you, as though I had been his brother's
wife. [8] And when Araspas, my warder, turned from him, I promised, if
he would let me send for you, I would bring him a friend in the
other's place, far nobler and more faithful."

[9] And as Pantheia spoke, Abradatas listened with rapture to her
words, and when she ended, he laid his hand upon her head, and looking
up to heaven he prayed aloud:

"O most mighty Zeus, make me worthy to be Pantheia's husband, and the
friend of Cyrus who showed us honour!"

[10] Then he opened the driver's seat and mounted the car, and the
driver shut the door, and Pantheia could not take him in her arms
again, so she bent and kissed the chariot-box. Then the car rolled
forward and she followed unseen till Abradatas turned and saw her and
cried, "Be strong, Pantheia, be of a good heart! Farewell, and hie
thee home!"

[11] Thereupon her chamberlains and her maidens took her and brought
her back to her own carriage, and laid her down and drew the awning.
But no man, of all who was there that day, splendid as Abradatas was
in his chariot, had eyes to look on him until Pantheia had gone.

[12] Meanwhile Cyrus had found the victims favourable, and his army
was already drawn up in the order he had fixed. He had scouts posted
ahead, one behind the other, and then he called his officers together
for his final words:

[13] "Gentlemen, my friends and allies, the sacred signs from heaven
are as they were the day the gods gave us victory before, and I would
call to your minds thoughts to bring you gladness and confidence for
the fight. [14] You are far better trained than your enemies, you have
lived together and worked together far longer than they, you have won
victories together. What they have shared with one another has been
defeat, and those who have not fought as yet feel they have traitors
to right and left of them, while our recruits know that they enter
battle in company with men who help their allies. [15] Those who trust
each other will stand firm and fight without flinching, but when
confidence has gone no man thinks of anything but flight. [16] Forward
then, gentlemen, against the foe; drive our scythed chariots against
their defenceless cars, let our armed cavalry charge their unprotected
horse, and charge them home. [17] The mass of their infantry you have
met before; and as for the Egyptians, they are armed in much the same
way as they are marshalled; they carry shields too big to let them
stir or see, they are drawn up a hundred deep, which will prevent all
but the merest handful fighting. [18] If they count on forcing us back
by their weigh, they must first withstand our steel and the charge of
our cavalry. And if any of them do hold firm, how can they fight at
once against cavalry, infantry, and turrets of artillery? For our men
on the towers will be there to help us, they will smite the enemy
until he flies instead of fighting. [19] If you think there is
anything wanting, tell me now; God helping us, we will lack nothing.
And if any man wishes to say anything, let him speak now; if not, go
to the altar and there pray to the gods to whom we have sacrificed,
and then fall in. [20] Let each man say to his own men what I have
said to him, let him show the men he rules that he is fit to rule, let
them see the fearlessness in his face, his bearing, and his words."


NOTES

C1.9. Artabazus "the kinsman" named now for the first time, why?

C1.11. Cf. Anglic "his word": a delicate appeal to a man of honour.
It suits G.'s character.

C1.14-15. Speech full of metaphor: winter stalking on, with hunter and
frost attendant on either side; a stealthy, but august advance.

C1.16. A happy simile: /vide/ Book of Wisdom [c. 5, 10, "And as a ship
that passeth over the waves of the water," etc.].

C1.38. How a fault may be turned to account: Hellenic stool of
repentance.

C1.41. Theory of two souls, to account for the yielding to base
desires. It works, but is it not the theory of a man whose will is
weak, as we say, or whose sympathetic nature has been developed at the
expense of his self-regulative? There is another way of putting it in
/Memorabilia/, Bk. I. c. ii.,  19-28. Xenophon is not more a
philosopher than a "philanthropist." He is full of compassion for
human weaknesses.

C1.44. Exit Araspas, to be baptised under this cloud of ignominy into
the sunshine of recognised joyous serviceableness.

C1.45. We grow fonder than ever of Pantheia.

C1.50. Irony: the chariots that are to cost Abradatas his life
hereafter. Is this tale "historic" at all? I mean, did Xenophon find
or hear any such story current? What is the relation, if any, to it of
Xenophon Ephesius, Antheia, and Abrocomas? [/Xenophon Ephesius/, a
late writer of romances.] Had that writer any echo of the names in his
head? What language are "Pantheia" and "Abradatas"?

C1.52. All very well, but the author hasn't told us anything about the
construction of these {mekhanai}, these battering engines, before, to
prepare us for this. Is that a slip, or how explainable? I think he is
betrayed into the description by reason of his interest in such
strategic matters. The expression is intelligible enough to any one
who knows about engines, just as we might speak of the butt or the
stanchion, or whatever it be.

C2.1-3. The Medians bring back the bread that was cast upon the
waters. Cyrus turns this gain to new account. He sacrifices the
present natural gain, i.e. the wealth, to the harder spiritual gain,
viz., their positive as opposed to their merely negative alliance.
Cyrus /is/ the archic man.

C2.4. I have a sort of idea, or feeling that here the writer takes up
his pen afresh after a certain interval. C4-6 are a reduplication, not
unnatural indeed, but /pro tanto/ tautological.

C2.7. Semi-historical basis. Prototype, when Agesilaus meditated the
advance on Persia, just before his recall. [See /Hellenica/, III. iv.,
Works II. p. 29.]

C2.13 foll. The archic man can by a word of his mouth still the
flutter and incipient heave of terror-stricken hearts.

C2.15-18. A review of the improvements amounting to a complete
revolution in arms and attack effected by Cyrus. This is imagined as
an ideal accompaniment to the archic man and conqueror. Xenophon
nowadays on the relative advantages of the bayonet and the sword,
cavalry and infantry, etc., would have been very interesting. Cf. a
writer like Forbes.

[C2.19. "Syrians." The word is used loosely, including the Assyrians
and their kindred. See below C.22. "Syria" = Assyria and the adjacent
country.]

C2.21, fin. Xenophon has more than once witnessed this clouding of the
brow, the scowl or sulk of the less stalwart moral-fibred men (notably
in /Hellenica/).

C2.26 ff. How to give up wine: the art in it. Now listen, all you
blue-ribbonists! Xenophon, Hygienist.

C2.37. One would like to know how the price was regulated. Does any
learned German know? Note the orderliness and economy of it all. Is
it, as far as the army goes, novel in any respect, do you suppose, or
only idealised Hellenic? Spartan?

C3.14. A slight (intentional?) aposiopesis. Did H. have to drive back
the great cavalry division of the enemy?

C3.17. How quickly the archic man passes on! Cf. J. P.

C3.19. Notice the part given to the Egyptians to play. Why? (Agesilaus
died on his last campaign in Egypt.)

C3.25. Is it dramatic to make Cyrus speak in this way as if he were
lecturing a class on strategics?

C3.30. The advantage even of sutlers and women. This several-times-
repeated remark surprises me. But no doubt the arrangement would give
the enemy pause, and waste his time in out-flanking movements: viol
tout, hgd. At Cunaxa, however, the Persian did get behind the Greek
camp. No prototype there, then. [Xenophon, /Anabasis/, Bk. I. c. 10.]

C4.2. We are more and more enamoured of Pantheia.

C4.7. As delicate as any modern in the respect for wedded womanhood.

C4.13 ff. Notice how in this stirring and inspiriting speech Cyrus by
dealing with the Egyptians (the only unknown quantity) strikes a new
note and sets up a new motive, as it were, preparing us for the tragic
struggle which is to come, which will cost Abradatas and other good
men dear, not to speak of the brave Egyptians themselves (cf. Sudanese
Arabs). Also note Xenophon's enthusiasm in reference to the new arming
and the odds of encounter between cavalry and infantry (cf. Napier,
Forbes, etc.).



BOOK VII

[C.1] So they prayed to the gods and went to their place, and the
squires brought food and drink to Cyrus and his staff as they stood
round the sacrifice. And he took his breakfast where he stood, after
making the due offering, sharing what he had with all who needed it,
and he poured out the libation and prayed, and then drank, and his men
with him.

Then he supplicated Zeus, the god of his fathers, to be his leader and
helper in the fight, and so he mounted his horse and bade those about
him follow. [2] All his squires were equipped as he was, with scarlet
tunics, breastplates of bronze, and brazen helmets plumed with white,
short swords, and a lance of cornel-wood apiece. Their horses had
frontlets, chest-plates, and armour for their shoulders, all of
bronze, and the shoulder-pieces served as leg-guards for the riders.
In one thing only the arms of Cyrus differed from the rest: theirs was
covered with a golden varnish and his flashed like a mirror. [3] As he
sat on his steed, gazing into the distance, where he meant to go, a
peal of thunder rang out on the right, and he cried, "We will follow
thee, O Zeus most high!"

So he set forth with Chrysantas on his right at the head of cavalry
and Arsamas on his left with infantry. [4] And the word went down the
lines, "Eyes on the standard and steady marching."

The standard was a golden eagle, with outspread wings, borne aloft on
a long spear-shaft, and to this day such is the standard of the
Persian king.

Before they came in full sight of the Assyrians Cyrus halted the army
thrice. [5] And when they had gone about two miles or more, they began
to see the enemy advancing. As soon as both armies were in full view
of each other, and the Assyrians could see how much they outflanked
the Persians on either side, Croesus halted, in order to prepare an
encircling movement, and pushed out a column on the right wing and the
left, so that the Persian forces might be attacked on every side at
once.

[6] Cyrus saw it, but gave no sign of stopping; he led straight on as
before. Meanwhile he noticed that the turning-point where the
Assyrians had pushed out on either flank was an immense distance from
their centre, and he said to Chrysantas:

"Do you see where they have fixed their angle?" "Yes, I do," answered
Chrysantas, "and I am surprised at it: it seems to me they are drawing
their wings too far away from their centre." "Just so," said Cyrus,
"and from ours too." [7] "Why are they doing that?" asked the other.
"Clearly," said Cyrus, "they are afraid we shall attack, if their
wings are in touch with us while their centre is still some way off."
"But," went on Chrysantas, "how can they support each other at such a
distance?" "Doubtless," said Cyrus, "as soon as their wings are
opposite our flanks, they will wheel round, and then advance at once
on every side and so set us fighting everywhere at once." [8] "Well,"
said Chrysantas, "do you think the movement wise?" "Yes," said Cyrus,
"it is good enough in view of what they can see, but, in view of what
they cannot, it is worse for them than if they had advanced in a
single column. Do you," he said, turning to Arsamas, "advance with
your infantry, slowly, taking your pace from me, and do you,
Chrysantas, march beside him with your cavalry, step for step. I will
make for their angle myself, where I propose to join battle, first
riding round the army to see how things are with all our men. [9] When
I reach the point, and we are on the verge of action, I will raise the
paean and then you must quicken your pace. You will know when we have
closed with the enemy, the din will be loud enough. At the same moment
Abradatas will dash out upon them: such will be his orders; your duty
is to follow, keeping as close to the chariots as possible. Thus we
shall fall on the enemy at the height of his confusion. And, God
helping me, I shall be with you also, cutting my way through the rout
by the quickest road I can.

[10] So he spoke, and sent the watchword down the lines, "Zeus our
saviour, and Zeus our leader," and went forward. As he passed between
the chariots and the cuirassiers, he would say to some, "My men, the
look on your faces rejoices my heart," and to others, "You understand,
gentlemen, that this battle is not for the victory of a day, but for
all that we have won ere now, and for all our happiness to come." [11]
And to others, "My friends, we can never reproach the gods again:
to-day they have put all blessings in our hands. [12] Let us show
ourselves good men and true." Or else, "Gentlemen, can we invite each
other to a more glorious feast than this? This day all gallant hearts
are bidden; this day they may feast their friends." [13] Or again,
"You know, I think, the prizes in this game: the victors pursue and
smite and slay, and win wealth and fame and freedom and empire: the
cowards lose them all. He who loves his own soul let him fight beside
me: for I will have no disgrace." [14] But if he met soldiers who had
fought for him before, he only said, "To you, gentlemen, what need I
say? You know the brave man's part in battle, and the craven's." [15]
And when he came to Abradatas, he halted, and Abradatas gave the reins
to his charioteer and came up to him, and others gathered round from
the infantry and the chariots, and Cyrus said:

"God has rewarded you, Abradatas, according to your prayer, you and
yours. You hold the first rank among our friends. And you will not
forget, when the moment for action comes, that those who watch you
will be Persians, and those who follow you, and they will not let you
bear the brunt alone."

[16] And Abradatas answered:

"Even so, Cyrus; and with us here, methinks, all looks well enough:
but the state of our flanks troubles me: the enemy's wings are strong
and stretch far: he has chariots there, and every kind of arm as well,
while we have nothing else with which to oppose him. So that for
myself," said he, "if I had not won by lot the post I hold, I should
feel ashamed to be here in the safest place of all."

[17] "Nay," answered Cyrus, "if it is well with you, have no concern
for the rest. God willing, I mean to relieve our flanks. But you
yourself, I conjure you, do not attack until you see the rout of those
detachments that you fear."

So much of boasting did Cyrus allow himself on the eve of action,
though he was the last man to boast at other times.

"When you see them routed," he said, "you may take it that I am there,
and then make your rush, for that is the moment when you will find the
enemy weakest and your own men strongest. [18] And while there is
time, Abradatas, be sure to drive along your front and prepare your
men for the charge, kindle their courage by your looks, lift up their
hearts by your hopes. Breathe a spirit of emulation into them, to make
them prove themselves the flower of the chariot-force. Be assured if
things go well with us all men will say nothing is so profitable as
valour."

[19] Accordingly Abradatas mounted his chariot and drove along the
lines to do as Cyrus bade.

Meanwhile Cyrus went on to the left where Hystaspas was posted with
half the Persian cavalry, and he called to him and said:

"Hystaspas, here is work to test your pace! If we are quick enough in
cutting off their heads, none of us will be slaughtered first."

[20] And Hystaspas answered with a laugh:

"Leave it to us! We'll see to the men opposite. But set some one to
deal with the fellows on our flank: it would be a pity for them to be
idle."

And Cyrus answered, "I am going to them myself. But remember,
Hystaspas, to which ever of us God grants the victory, so long as a
single foeman is on the field, attack we must, again and again, until
the last has yielded."

[21] With that he passed on, and as he came to the flank he went up to
the officer in command of the chariots and said to him:

"Good, I intend to support you myself. And when you hear me fall on
the wing, at that instant do your best to charge straight through your
opponents; you will be far safer once outside their ranks than if you
are caught half-way."

[22] Then he went on to the rear and the carriages, where the two
detachments were stationed, a thousand horse and a thousand foot, and
told Artagersas and Pharnouchus, their leaders, to keep the men where
they were.

"But when," he added, "you see me close with the enemy on our right,
then set upon those in front of you: take them in flank, where they
are weakest, while you advance in line, at your full strength. Their
lines, as you see, are closed by cavalry; hurl your camels at these,
and you may be sure, even before the fighting begins, they will cut a
comic figure."

[23] Thus, with all his dispositions made, Cyrus rode round the head
of his right. By this time Croesus, believing that the centre, where
he himself was marching, must be nearer the enemy than the distant
wings, had the signal raised for them to stop their advance, halt, and
wheel round where they were. When they were in position opposite the
Persian force, he signalled for them to charge, and thus three columns
came at once against Cyrus, one facing his front and one on either
flank. [24] A tremor ran through the whole army; it was completely
enclosed, like a little brick laid within a large, with the forces of
the enemy all round it, on every side except the rear, cavalry and
heavy infantry, targeteers, archers, and chariots. [25] None the less,
the instant Cyrus gave the word they swung round to confront the foe.
There was deep silence through the ranks as they realised what they
had to face, and then Cyrus, when the moment came, began the battle-
hymn and it thundered through the host. [26] And as it died away the
war-cry rang out unto the God of Battles, and Cyrus swooped forward at
the head of his cavalry, straight for the enemy's flank, and closed
with them then and there, while the infantry behind him followed,
swift and steady, wave on wave, sweeping out on either side, far out-
flanking their opponents, for they attacked in line and the foe were
in column, to the great gain of Cyrus. A short struggle, and the ranks
broke and fled before him headlong. [27] Artagersas, seeing that Cyrus
had got to work, made his own charge on the left, hurling his camels
forward as Cyrus had advised. Even at a distance the horses could not
face the camels: they seemed to go mad with fear, and galloped off in
terror, rearing and falling foul of one another: such is the strange
effect of camels upon horses. [28] So that Artagersas, his own troops
well in hand, had easy work with the enemy's bewildered masses. At the
same moment the war-chariots dashed in, right and left, so that many,
flying from the chariots, were cut down by the troopers, and many,
flying from these, were caught by the chariots. [29] And now Abradatas
could wait no longer. "Follow me, my friends," he shouted, and drove
straight at the enemy, lashing his good steeds forward till their
flanks were bloody with the goad, the other charioteers racing hard
behind him. The enemy's chariots fled before them instantly, some not
even waiting to take up their fighting-men. [30] But Abradatas drove
on through them, straight into the main body of the Egyptians, his
rush shared by his comrades on either hand. And then, what has often
been shown elsewhere was shown here, namely, that of all strong
formations the strongest is a band of friends. His brothers-in-arms
and his mess-mates charged with him, but the others, when they saw
that the solid ranks of the Egyptians stood firm, swung round and
pursued the flying chariots. [31] Meanwhile Abradatas and his
companions could make no further way: there was not a gap through the
Egyptian lines on either hand, and they could but charge the single
soldiers where they stood, overthrow them by the sheer weight of horse
and car, and crush them and their arms beneath the hoofs and wheels.
And where the scythes caught them, men and weapons were cut to shreds.
[32] In the midst of indescribable confusion, the chariots rocking
among the weltering mounds, Abradatas was thrown out and some of his
comrades with him. There they stood, and fought like men, and there
they were cut down and died. The Persians, pouring in after them,
dealt slaughter and destruction where Abradatas and his men had
charged and shaken the ranks, but elsewhere the Egyptians, who were
still unscathed, and they were many, moved steadily on to meet them.

[33] There followed a desperate struggle with lance and spear and
sword, and still the Egyptians had the advantage, because of their
numbers and their weapons. Their spears were immensely stout and long,
such as they carry to this day, and the huge shield not only gave more
protection than corslet and buckler, but aided the thrust of the
fighter, slung as it was from the shoulder.

[34] Shield locked into shield, they thrust their way forward; and the
Persians could not drive them back, with their light bucklers borne on
the forearm only. Step by step they gave ground, dealing blow for
blow, till they came under cover of their own artillery. Then at last
a second shower of blows fell on the Egyptians, while the reserves
would allow no flight of the archers or the javelin-men: at the
sword's point they made them do their duty. [35] Thick was the
slaughter, and loud the din of clashing weapons and whirring darts,
and shouting warriors, cheering each other and calling on the gods.

[36] At this moment Cyrus appeared, cutting his way through his own
opponents. To see the Persians thrust from their position was misery
to him, but he knew he could check the enemy's advance most quickly by
galloping round to their rear, and thither he dashed, bidding his
troops follow, and there they fell upon them and smote them as they
were gazing ahead, and there they mowed them down.

[37] The Egyptians, seeing what had happened, cried out that the enemy
had taken them in the rear, and wheeled round under a storm of blows.
At this the confusion reached its height, cavalry and infantry
struggling all together. An Egyptian fell under Cyrus' horse, and as
the hoofs struck him he stabbed the creature in the belly. The charger
reared at the blow and Cyrus was thrown. [38] Then was seen what it is
for a leader to be loved by his men. With a terrible cry the men
dashed forward, conquering thrust with thrust and blow with blow. One
of his squires leapt down and set Cyrus on his own charger. [39] And
as Cyrus sprang on the horse he saw the Egyptians worsted everywhere.
For by now Hystaspas was on the ground with his cavalry, and
Chrysantas also. Still Cyrus would not allow them to charge the
Egyptian phalanx: the archers and javelin-men were to play on them
from outside. Then he made his way along the lines to the artillery,
and there he mounted one of the towers to take a survey of the field,
and see if any of the foe still held their ground and kept up the
fight. [40] But he saw the plain one chaos of flying horses and men
and chariots, pursuers and pursued, conquerors and conquered, and
nowhere any who still stood firm, save only the Egyptians. These, in
sore straits as they were, formed themselves into a circle behind a
ring of steel, and sat down under cover of their enormous shields.
They no longer attempted to act, but they suffered, and suffered
heavily. [41] Cyrus, in admiration and pity, unwilling that men so
brave should be done to death, drew off his soldiers who were fighting
round them, and would not let another man lift sword.

Then he sent them a herald asking if they wished to be cut to pieces
for the sake of those who had betrayed them, or save their lives and
keep their reputation for gallantry? And they answered, "Is it
possible that we can be saved and yet keep our reputation
untarnished?" [42] And Cyrus said, "Surely yes, for we ourselves have
seen that you alone have held your ground and been ready to fight."
"But even so," said the Egyptians, "how can we act in honour if we
save ourselves?"

"By betraying none of those at whose side you fought," answered Cyrus:
"only surrender your arms to us, and become our friends, the friends
of men who chose to save you when they might have destroyed you." [43]
"And if we become your friends," said they, "how will you treat us?"
"As you treat us," answered he, "and the treatment shall be good."

"And what will that good treatment be?" they asked once more. "This,"
said Cyrus: "better pay than you have had, so long as the war lasts,
and when peace comes, if you choose to stay with me, lands and cities
and women and servants." [44] Then they asked him if he would excuse
them from one duty, service against Croesus. Croesus, they said, was
the only leader who knew them; for the rest, they were content to
agree. And so they came to terms, and took and gave pledges of good
faith. [45] Thus it came about that their descendants are to this day
faithful subjects of the king, and Cyrus gave them cities, some in the
interior, which are still called the cities of the Egyptians, beside
Larissa and Kyllene and Kyme on the coast, still held by their
descendants.

When this matter was arranged darkness had already fallen, and Cyrus
drew off his army and encamped at Thymbrara.

[46] In this engagement the Egyptians alone among the enemy won
themselves renown, and of the troops under Cyrus the Persian cavalry
was held to have done the best, so much so that to this day they are
still armed in the manner that Cyrus devised. [47] High praise also
was given to the scythe-bearing chariots, and this engine of war is
still employed by the reigning king. [48] As for the camels, all they
did was to scare the horses; their riders could take no part in the
slaughter, and were never touched themselves by the enemy's cavalry.
For not a horse would come near the camels. [49] It was a useful arm,
certainly, but no gallant gentleman would dream of breeding camels for
his own use or learning to fight on camel-back. And so they returned
to their old position among the baggage-train.

[C.2] Then Cyrus and his men took their evening meal and posted their
pickets and went to rest. But Croesus and his army fled in haste to
Sardis, and the other tribes hurried away homewards under cover of
night as fast and as far as they could. [2] When day broke Cyrus
marched straight for Sardis, and when he came before the citadel he
set up his engines as though for the assault and got out his ladders.
But the following night he sent a scaling party of Persians and
Chaldaeans to climb the fortifications at the steepest point. The
guide was a Persian who had served as a slave to one of the garrison
in the citadel, and who knew a way down to the river by which one
could get up. [4] As soon as it became clear that the heights had been
taken, all the Lydians without exception fled from the walls and hid
wherever they could. At daybreak Cyrus entered the city and gave
orders that not a man was to leave the ranks. [5] Croesus, who had
shut himself up inside his palace, cried out on Cyrus, and Cyrus left
a guard round the building while he himself went to inspect the
captured citadel. Here he found the Persians keeping guard in perfect
order, but the Chaldaean quarters were deserted, for the men had
rushed down to pillage the town. Immediately he summoned their
officers, and bade them leave his army at once. [6] "I could never
endure," he said, "to have undisciplined fellows seizing the best of
everything. You know well enough," he added, "all that was in store
for you. I meant to make all who served with me the envy of their
fellows; but now," he said, "you cannot be surprised if you encounter
some one stronger than yourselves on your way home."

[7] Fear fell on the Chaldaeans at this, and they intreated him to lay
aside his anger and vowed they would give back all the booty they had
taken. He answered that he had no need of it himself. "But if," he
added, "you wish to appease me, you will hand it over to those who
stayed and guarded the citadel. For if my soldiers see that discipline
means reward, all will be well with us."

[8] So the Chaldaeans did as he bade them, and the faithful and
obedient received all manner of good things.

Then Cyrus made his troops encamp in the most convenient quarter of
the town, and told them to stay at their posts and take their
breakfast there. [9] That done, he gave orders that Croesus should be
brought to him, and when he came into his presence, Croesus cried:

"Hail, Cyrus, my lord and master! Fate has given you that title from
now henceforward, and thus must I salute you."

[20] "All hail to you likewise," answered Cyrus: "we are both of us
men. And tell me now," he continued, "would you be more willing to
advise me as a friend?" "I should be more than glad," said Croesus,
"to do you any good. It would mean good for myself, I know." [11]
"Listen, then," answered Cyrus: "I see that my soldiers have endured
much toil and encountered many dangers, and now they are persuaded
that they have taken the wealthiest city in all Asia, after Babylon. I
would not have them cheated of their recompense, seeing that if they
win nothing by their labour, I know not how I can keep them obedient
to me for long. Yet I am unwilling to give them this city over to
plunder. I believe it would be utterly destroyed, and moreover I know
full well that in plunder the worst villains win the most."

[12] To this Croesus answered, "Suffer me then to tell what Lydians I
please that I have won your promise that the city shall not be sacked,
nor their women and children made away with. [13] I promise you in
return that my men will bring you willingly everything that is costly
and beautiful in Sardis. If I can announce such terms, I am certain
there is not one treasure belonging to man or woman that will not be
yours to-morrow. Further, on this day year, the city will overflow
once more with wealth and beauty. But if you sack it, you will destroy
the crafts in its ruin, and they, we know, are the well-spring of all
loveliness. [14] Howbeit, you need not decide at once, wait and see
what is brought to you. Send first," he added, "to my own treasuries,
and let your guards take some of my own men with them."

To all this Cyrus consented, and then he said:

[15] "And now, O Croesus, tell me one thing more. How did matters go
between you and the oracle at Delphi? It is said that you did much
reverence to Apollo and obeyed him in all things."

[16] "I could wish it had been so," said Croesus, "but, truth to say,
from the beginning I have acted in all things against him." "How can
that be?" said Cyrus. "Explain it to me: for your words seem strange
indeed." [17] "Because," he answered, "in the first place, instead of
asking the god for all I wanted I must needs put him to the test, to
see if he could speak the truth. This," he added, "no man of honour
could endure, let be the godhead. Those who are doubted cannot love
their doubters. [18] And yet he stood the test; for though the things
I did were strange, and I was many leagues from Delphi, he knew them
all. And so I resolved to consult him about my children. [19] At first
he would not so much as answer me, but I sent him many an offering,
some of gold and some of silver, and I propitiated him, as I deemed,
by countless sacrifices, and at last he answered me when I asked him
what I must do that sons might be born to me. He said they should be
born. [20] And so they were; in that he uttered no lie, but they
brought me no joy. One of them was dumb his whole life long, and the
noblest perished in the flower of his youth. And I, crushed by these
sorrows, sent again to the god and asked him how I could live in
happiness for the rest of my days, and he answered:

  "'Know thyself, O Croesus, and happiness shall be thine.'

"And when I heard the oracle, I was comforted. [21] I said to myself,
the god has laid the lightest of tasks upon me, and promised me
happiness in return. Some of his neighbours a man may know and others
not: but every one can know himself. [22] So I thought, and in truth
so long as I was at peace I had no fault to find with my lot after my
son's death; but when the Assyrian persuaded me to march against you I
encountered every danger. Yet I was saved, I came to no harm. Once
again, therefore, I have no charge to bring against the god: when I
/knew myself/ incapable of warring against you, he came to my help and
saved mine and me. [23] But afterwards, intoxicated by my wealth,
cajoled by those who begged me to be their leader, tempted by the
gifts they showered on me, flattered by all who said that if I would
but lead them they would obey me to a man, and that I would be the
greatest ruler in all the world, and that all their kings had met
together and chosen me for their champion in the war, I undertook the
generalship as though I were born to be the monarch of the world, for
I did not /know myself/. [24] I thought myself able to fight against
you, you who are sprung from the seed of the gods, born of a royal
line, trained in valour and virtue from your youth, while I--I believe
that the first of my ancestors to reign won his freedom and his crown
on the self-same day. For this dull ignorance of mine I see I am
justly punished. [25] But now at last, O Cyrus," he cried, "now I
/know myself/. And tell me, do you think the god will still speak
truth? Do you think that, knowing myself, I can be happy now? I ask
you, because you of all men have it in your power to answer best.
Happiness is yours to give."

[26] Cyrus answered, "Give me time to deliberate, Croesus. I bear in
mind your former happiness and I pity you. I give you back at once
your wife and your daughters (for they tell me you have daughters),
and your friends and your attendants; they are yours once more. And
yours it is to sit at your own table as you used to live. But battles
and wars I must put out of your power."

[27] "Now by the gods above us," cried Croesus, "you need take no
further thought about your answer: if you will do for me what you say,
I shall live the life that all men called the happiest of lives, and I
knew that they were right." [28] "And who," said Cyrus, "who was it
that lived that life of happiness?" "My own wife," said Croesus; "she
shared all my good things with me, my luxuries, my softest joys; but
in the cares on which those joys were based, in war and battle and
strife, she had no part or lot. Methinks, you will provide for me as I
provided for her whom I loved beyond all others in the world, and I
must needs send to Apollo again, and send thank-offerings."

[29] And as Cyrus listened he marvelled at the man's contentedness of
soul, and for the future wherever he went he took Croesus with him,
either because he thought he might be useful or perhaps because he
felt it was safer so.

[C.3] So for that night they rested. But the next day Cyrus called his
friends and generals together and told some to make an inventory of
their treasures and others to receive all the wealth that Croesus
brought in. First they were to set aside for the gods all that the
Persian priests thought fit, and then store the rest in coffers,
weight them, and pack them on waggons, distributing the waggons by lot
to take with them on the march, so that they could receive their
proper share at any convenient time. [2] So they set about the work.

Then Cyrus called some of his squires and said:

"Tell me, have any of you seen Abradatas? I wonder that he who used to
come to me so often is nowhere to be found."

[3] Then one of the squires made answer, "My lord, he is dead: he fell
in the battle, charging straight into the Egyptian ranks: the rest,
all but his own companions, swerved before their close array. [4] And
now," he added, "we hear that his wife has found his body and laid it
in her own car, and has brought it here to the banks of the Pactolus.
[5] Her chamberlains and her attendants are digging a grave for the
dead man upon a hill, and she, they say, has put her fairest raiment
on him and her jewels, and she is seated on the ground with his head
upon her knees."

[6] Then Cyrus smote his hand upon his thigh and leapt up and sprang
to horse, galloping to the place of sorrow, with a thousand troopers
at his back. [7] He bade Gadatas and Gobryas take what jewels they
could find to honour the dear friend and brave warrior who had fallen,
and follow with all speed: and he bade the keepers of the herds, the
cattle, and the horses drive up their flocks wherever they heard he
was, that he might sacrifice on the grave.

[8] But when he saw Pantheia seated on the ground and the dead man
lying there, the tears ran down his cheeks and he cried:

"O noble and loyal spirit, have you gone from us?"

Then he took the dead man by the hand, but the hand came away with his
own: it had been hacked by an Egyptian blade. [9] And when he saw
that, his sorrow grew, and Pantheia sobbed aloud and took the hand
from Cyrus and kissed it and laid it in its place, as best she could,
and said:

[10] "It is all like that, Cyrus. But why should you see it?" And
presently she said, "All this, I know, he suffered for my sake, and
for yours too, Cyrus, perhaps as much. I was a fool: I urged him so to
bear himself as became a faithful friend of yours, and he, I know, he
never thought once of his own safety, but only of what he might do to
show his gratitude. Now he has fallen, without a stain upon his
valour: and I, who urged him, I live on to sit beside his grave."

[11] And Cyrus wept silently for a while, and then he said:

"Lady, his end was the noblest and the fairest that could be: he died
in the hour of victory. Take these gifts that I have brought and adorn
him."

For now Gobryas and Gadatas appeared with store of jewels and rich
apparel. "He shall not lack for honour," Cyrus said; "many hands will
raise his monument: it shall be a royal one; and we will offer such
sacrifice as befits a hero. [12] And you, lady," he added, "you shall
not be left desolate. I reverence your chastity and your nobleness,
and I will give you a guardian to lead you withersoever you choose, if
you will but tell me to whom you wish to go."

[13] And Pantheia answered:

"Be at rest, Cyrus, I will not hide from you to whom I long to go."

[14] Therewith Cyrus took his leave of her and went, pitying from his
heart the woman who had lost so brave a husband, and the dead man in
his grave, taken from so sweet a wife, never to see her more. Then
Pantheia bade her chamberlains stand aside "until," she said, "I have
wept over him as I would." But she made her nurse stay with her and
she said:

"Nurse, when I am dead, cover us with the same cloak." And the nurse
entreated and besought her, but she could not move her, and when she
saw that she did but vex her mistress, she sat down and wept in
silence. Then Pantheia took the scimitar, that had been ready for her
so long, and drew it across her throat, and dropped her head upon her
husband's breast and died. And the nurse cried bitterly, but she
covered the two with one cloak as her mistress had bidden her.

[15] And when Cyrus heard what Pantheia had done he rushed out in
horror to see if he could save her. And when the three chamberlains
saw what had happened they drew their own scimitars and killed
themselves, there where she had bidden them stand. [16, 17] And when
Cyrus came to that place of sorrow, he looked with wonder and
reverence on the woman, and wept for her and went his way and saw that
all due honour was paid to those who lay there dead, and a mighty
sepulchre was raised above them, mightier, men say, than had been seen
in all the world before.

[C.4] After this the Carians, who were always at war and strife with
one another, because their dwellings were fortified, sent to Cyrus and
asked for aid. Cyrus himself was unwilling to leave Sardis, where he
was having engines of artillery made and battering-rams to overthrow
the walls of those who would not listen to him. But he sent Adousius,
a Persian, in his place, a man of sound judgment and a stout soldier
and withal a person of winning presence. He gave him an army; and the
Cilicians and Cypriotes were very ready to serve under him. [2] That
was why Cyrus never sent a Persian satrap to govern either Cilicia or
Cyprus; he was always satisfied with the native kings; only he exacted
tribute and levied troops whenever he needed them.

[3] So Adousius took his army and marched into Caria, where he was met
by the men of both parties, ready to receive him inside their walls to
the detriment of their opponents. Adousius treated each in exactly the
same way, he told whichever side was pleading that he thought their
case was just, but it was essential that the others should not realise
he was their friend, "for thus, you perceive, I will take them
unprepared whenever I attack."

He insisted they should give him pledges of good faith, and the
Carians had to swear they would receive him without fraud or guile
within their walls and for the welfare of Cyrus and the Persians; and
on his side he was willing to swear that he would enter without fraud
or guile himself and for the welfare of those who received him. [4]
Having imposed these terms on either party without the knowledge of
the other, he fixed on the same night with both, entered the walls,
and had the strongholds of both parties in his hands. At break of day
he took his place in the midst with his army, and sent for the leading
men on either side. Thus confronted with each other they were more
than a little vexed, and both imagined they had been cheated. [5]
However, Adousius began:

"Gentlemen, I took an oath to you that I would enter your walls
without fraud or guile and for the welfare of those who received me.
Now if I am forced to destroy either of you, I am persuaded I shall
have entered to the detriment of the Carians. But if I give you peace,
so that you can till your lands in safety, I imagine I shall have come
for your welfare. Therefore from this day forwards you must meet on
friendly terms, cultivate your fields without fear, give your children
to each other, and if any one offends against these laws, Cyrus and
ourselves will be his enemies."

[6] At that the city gates were flung wide open, the roads were filled
with folk hurrying to one another, the fields were thronged with
labourers. They held high festival together, and the land was full of
peace and joyfulness.

[7] Meanwhile messengers came from Cyrus inquiring whether there was
need for more troops or siege-engines, but Adousius answered, on the
contrary his present force was at Cyrus' service to employ elsewhere
if he wished, and so drew off his army, only leaving a garrison in the
citadels. Thereupon the Carians implored him to remain, and when he
would not, they sent to Cyrus begging him to make Adousius their
satrap.

[8] Meanwhile Cyrus had sent Hystaspas with an army into Phrygia on
the Hellespont, and when Adousius came back he bade him follow, for
the Phrygians would be more willing to obey Hystaspas if they heard
that another army was advancing.

[9] Now the Hellenes on the seaboard offered many gifts and bargained
not to receive the Asiatics within their walls, but only to pay
tribute and serve wherever Cyrus commanded. [10] But the king of
Phrygia made preparations to hold his fortresses and not yield, and
sent out orders to that effect. However, when his lieutenants deserted
him and he found himself all alone, he had to put himself in the hands
of Hystaspas, and leave his fate to the judgment of Cyrus. Then
Hystaspas stationed strong Persian garrisons in all the citadels, and
departed, taking with him not only his own troops but many mounted men
and targeteers from Phrygia. [11] And Cyrus sent word to Adousius to
join Hystaspas, put himself at the head of those who had submitted and
allow them to retain their arms, while those who showed a disposition
to resist were to be deprived of their horses and their weapons and
made to follow the army as slingers.

[12] While his lieutenants were thus employed, Cyrus set out from
Sardis, leaving a large force of infantry to garrison the place, and
taking Croesus with him, and a long train of waggons laden with riches
of every kind. Croesus presented an accurate inventory of everything
in each waggon, and said, as he delivered the scrolls:

"With these in your possession, Cyrus, you can tell whether your
officers are handing over their freights in full or not."

[13] And Cyrus answered:

"It was kindly done, Croesus, on your part, to take thought for this:
but I have arranged that the freights should be in charge of those who
are entitled to them, so that if the men steal, they steal their own
property."

With these words he handed the documents to his friends and officers
to serve as checks on their own stewards.

[14] Cyrus also took Lydians in his train; allowing some to carry
arms, those, namely, who were at pains to keep their weapons in good
order, and their horses and chariots, and who did their best to please
him, but if they gave themselves ungracious airs, he took away their
horses and bestowed them on the Persians who had served him from the
beginning of the campaign, burnt their weapons, and forced them to
follow the army as slingers. [15] Indeed, as a rule, he compelled all
the subject population who had been disarmed to practise the use of
the sling: it was, he considered, a weapon for slaves. No doubt there
are occasions when a body of slingers, working with other detachments,
can do excellent service, but, taken alone, not all the slingers in
the world could face a mere handful armed with steel.

[16] Cyrus was marching to Babylon, but on his way he subdued the
Phrygians of Greater Phrygia and the Cappadocians, and reduced the
Arabians to subjection. These successes enabled him to increase his
Persian cavalry till it was not far short of forty thousand men, and
he had still horses left over to distribute among his allies at large.

At length he came before Babylon with an immense body of cavalry,
archers, and javelin-men, beside slingers innumerable.

[C.5] When Cyrus reached the city he surrounded it entirely with his
forces, and then rode round the walls himself, attended by his friends
and the leading officers of the allies. [2] Having surveyed the
fortifications, he prepared to lead off his troops, and at that moment
a deserter came to inform him that the Assyrians intended to attack as
soon as he began to withdraw, for they had inspected his forces from
the walls and considered them very weak. This was not surprising, for
the circuit of the city was so enormous that it was impossible to
surround it without seriously thinning the lines. [3] When Cyrus heard
of their intention, he took up his post in the centre of his troops
with his own staff round him and sent orders to the infantry for the
wings to double back on either side, marching past the stationary
centre of the line, until they met in the rear exactly opposite
himself. [4] Thus the men in front were immediately encouraged by the
doubling of their depth, and those who retired were equally cheered,
for they saw that the others would encounter the enemy first. The two
wings being united, the power of the whole force was strengthened,
those behind being protected by those in front and those in front
supported by those behind. [5] When the phalanx was thus folded back
on itself, both the front and the rear ranks were formed of picked
men, a disposition that seemed calculated to encourage valour and
check flight. On the flanks, the cavalry and the light infantry were
drawn nearer and nearer to the commander as the line contracted. [6]
When the whole phalanx was in close order, they fell back from the
walls, slowly, facing the foe, until they were out of range; then they
turned, marched a few paces, and then wheeled round again to the left,
and halted, facing the walls, but the further they got the less often
they paused, until, feeling themselves secure, they quickened their
pace and went off in an uninterrupted march until they reached their
quarters.

[7] When they were encamped, Cyrus called a council of his officers
and said, "My friends and allies, we have surveyed the city on every
side, and for my part I fail to see any possibility of taking by
assault walls so lofty and so strong: on the other hand, the greater
the population the more quickly must they yield to hunger, unless they
come out to fight. If none of you have any other scheme to suggest, I
propose that we reduce them by blockade."

[8] Then Chrysantas spoke:

"Does not the river flow through the middle of the city, and it is not
at least a quarter of a mile in width?"

"To be sure it is," answered Gobryas, "and so deep that the water
would cover two men, one standing on the other's shoulders; in fact
the city is even better protected by its river than by its walls."

[9] At which Cyrus said, "Well, Chrysantas, we must forego what is
beyond our power: but let us measure off at once the work for each of
us, set to, and dig a trench as wide and as deep as we can, that we
may need as few guards as possible."

[10] Thereupon Cyrus took his measurements all round the city, and,
leaving a space on either bank of the river large enough for a lofty
tower, he had a gigantic trench dug from end to end of the wall, his
men heaping up the earth on their own side. [11] Then he set to work
to build his towers by the river. The foundations were of palm-trees,
a hundred feet long and more--the palm-tree grows to a greater height
than that, and under pressure it will curve upwards like the spine of
an ass beneath a load. [12] He laid these foundations in order to give
the impression that he meant to besiege the town, and was taking
precautions so that the river, even if it found its way into his
trench, should not carry off his towers. Then he had other towers
built along the mound, so as to have as many guard-posts as possible.
[13] Thus his army was employed, but the men within the walls laughed
at his preparations, knowing they had supplies to last them more than
twenty years. When Cyrus heard that, he divided his army into twelve,
each division to keep guard for one month in the year. [14] At this
the Babylonians laughed louder still, greatly pleased at the idea of
being guarded by Phrygians and Lydians and Arabians and Cappadocians,
all of whom, they thought, would be more friendly to themselves than
to the Persians.

[15] However by this time the trenches were dug. And Cyrus heard that
it was a time of high festival in Babylon when the citizens drink and
make merry the whole night long. As soon as the darkness fell, he set
his men to work. [16] The mouths of the trenches were opened, and
during the night the water poured in, so that the river-bed formed a
highway into the heart of the town.

[17] When the great stream had taken to its new channel, Cyrus ordered
his Persian officers to bring up their thousands, horse and foot
alike, each detachment drawn up two deep, the allies to follow in
their old order. [18] They lined up immediately, and Cyrus made his
own bodyguard descend into the dry channel first, to see if the bottom
was firm enough for marching. [19] When they said it was, he called a
council of all his generals and spoke as follows:

[20] "My friends, the river has stepped aside for us; he offers us a
passage by his own high-road into Babylon. We must take heart and
enter fearlessly, remembering that those against whom we are to march
this night are the very men we have conquered before, and that too
when they had their allies to help them, when they were awake, alert,
and sober, armed to the teeth, and in their battle order. [21]
To-night we go against them when some are asleep and some are drunk,
and all are unprepared: and when they learn that we are within the
walls, sheer astonishment will make them still more helpless than
before. [22] If any of you are troubled by the thought of volleys from
the roofs when the army enters the city, I bid you lay these fears
aside: if our enemies do climb their roofs we have a god to help us,
the god of Fire. Their porches are easily set aflame, for the doors
are made of palm-wood and varnished with bitumen, the very food of
fire. [23] And we shall come with the pine-torch to kindle it, and
with pitch and tow to feed it. They will be forced to flee from their
homes or be burnt to death. [24] Come, take your swords in your hand:
God helping me, I will lead you on. Do you," he said, turning to
Gadatas and Gobryas, "show us the streets, you know them; and once we
are inside, lead us straight to the palace."

[25] "So we will," said Gobryas and his men, "and it would not
surprise us to find the palace-gates unbarred, for this night the
whole city is given over to revelry. Still, we are sure to find a
guard, for one is always stationed there."

"Then," said Cyrus, "there is no time for lingering; we must be off at
once and take them unprepared."

[26] Thereupon they entered: and of those they met some were struck
down and slain, and others fled into their houses, and some raised the
hue and cry, but Gobryas and his friends covered the cry with their
shouts, as though they were revellers themselves. And thus, making
their way by the quickest route, they soon found themselves before the
king's palace. [27] Here the detachment under Gobryas and Gadatas
found the gates closed, but the men appointed to attack the guards
rushed on them as they lay drinking round a blazing fire, and closed
with them then and there. [28] As the din grew louder and louder,
those within became aware of the tumult, till, the king bidding them
see what it meant, some of them opened the gates and ran out. [29]
Gadatas and his men, seeing the gates swing wide, darted in, hard on
the heels of the others who fled back again, and they chased them at
the sword's point into the presence of the king.

[30] They found him on his feet, with his drawn scimitar in his hand.
By sheer weight of numbers they overwhelmed him: and not one of his
retinue escaped, they were all cut down, some flying, others snatching
up anything to serve as a shield and defending themselves as best they
could. [31] Cyrus sent squadrons of cavalry down the different roads
with orders to kill all they found in the street, while those who knew
Assyrian were to warn the inhabitants to stay indoors under pain of
death. [32] While they carried out these orders, Gobryas and Gadatas
returned, and first they gave thanks to the gods and did obeisance
because they had been suffered to take vengeance on their unrighteous
king, and then they fell to kissing the hands and feet of Cyrus,
shedding tears of joy and gratitude. [33] And when it was day and
those who held the heights knew that the city was taken and the king
slain, they were persuaded to surrender the citadel themselves. [34]
Cyrus took it over forthwith, and sent in a commandant and a garrison,
while he delivered the bodies of the fallen to their kinsfolk for
burial, and bade his heralds make proclamation that all the citizens
must deliver up their arms: wherever weapons were discovered in any
house all the inmates would be put to death. So the arms were
surrendered, and Cyrus had them placed in the citadel for use in case
of need. [35] When all was done he summoned the Persian priests and
told them the city was the captive of his spear and bade them set
aside the first-fruits of the booty as an offering to the gods and
mark out land for sacred demesnes. Then he distributed the houses and
the public buildings to those whom he counted his partners in the
exploit; and the distribution was on the principle accepted, the best
prizes to the bravest men: and if any thought they had not received
their deserts they were invited to come and tell him. [36] At the same
time he issued a proclamation to the Babylonians, bidding them till
the soil and pay the dues and render willing service to those under
whose rule they were placed. As for his partners the Persians, and
such of his allies as elected to remain with him, he gave them to
understand they were to treat as subjects the captives they received.

[37] After this Cyrus felt that the time was come to assume the style
and manner that became a king: and he wished this to be done with the
goodwill and concurrence of his friends and in such a way that,
without seeming ungracious, he might appear but seldom in public and
always with a certain majesty. Therefore he devised the following
scheme. At break of day he took his station at some convenient place,
and received all who desired speech with him, and then dismissed them.
[38] The people, when they heard that he gave audience, thronged to
him in multitudes, and in the struggle to gain access there was much
jostling and scheming and no little fighting. [39] His attendants did
their best to divide the suitors, and introduce them in some order,
and whenever any of his personal friends appeared, thrusting their way
through the crowd, Cyrus would stretch out his hand and draw them to
his side and say, "Wait, my friends, until we have finished with this
crowd, and then we can talk at our ease." So his friends would wait,
but the multitude would pour on, growing greater and greater, until
the evening would fall before there had been a moment's leisure for
his friends. [40] All that Cyrus could do then was to say, "Perhaps,
gentlemen, it is a little late this evening and time that we broke up.
Be sure to come early to-morrow. I am very anxious myself to speak
with you." With that his friends were only too glad to be dismissed,
and made off without more ado. They had done penance enough, fasting
and waiting and standing all day long. [41] So they would get to rest
at last, but the next morning Cyrus was at the same spot and a much
greater concourse of suitors round him than before, already assembled
long before his friends arrived. Accordingly Cyrus had a cordon of
Persian lancers stationed round him, and gave out that no one except
his personal friends and the generals were to be allowed access, and
as soon as they were admitted he said:

[42] "My friends, we cannot exclaim against the gods as though they
had failed to fulfil our prayers. They have granted all we asked. But
if success means that a man must forfeit his own leisure and the good
company of all his friends, why, to that kind of happiness I would
rather bid farewell. [43] Yesterday," he added, "I make no doubt you
observed yourselves that from early dawn till late evening I never
ceased listening to petitioners, and to-day you see this crowd before
us, larger still than yesterday's, ready with business for me. [44] If
this must be submitted to, I calculate that what you will get of me
and I of you will be little enough, and what I shall get of myself
will simply be nothing at all. Further," he added, "I foresee another
absurd consequence. [45] I, personally, have a feeling towards you
which I need not state, but, of that audience yonder, scarcely one of
them do I know at all, and yet they are all prepared to thrust
themselves in front of you, transact their business, and get what they
want out of me before any of you have a chance. I should have thought
it more suitable myself that men of that class, if they wanted
anything from me, should pay some court to you, my friends, in the
hopes of an introduction. [46] Perhaps you will ask why I did not so
arrange matters from the first, instead of always appearing in public.
Because in war it is the first business of a commander not to be
behindhand in knowing what ought to be done and seeing that it is
done, and the general who is seldom seen is apt to let things slip.
[47] But to-day, when war with its insatiable demands is over, I feel
as if I had some claim myself to rest and refreshment. I am in some
perplexity, however, as to how I can arrange matters so that all goes
well, not only with you and me, but also with those whom we are bound
to care for. Therefore I seek your advice and counsel, and I would be
glad to learn from any of you the happiest solution."

[48] Cyrus paused, and up rose Artabazus the Mede, who had claimed to
be his kinsman, and said:

"You did well, Cyrus, to open this matter. Years ago, when you were
still a boy, from the very first I longed to be your friend, but I saw
you did not need me, and so I shrank from approaching you. [49] Then
came a lucky moment when you did have need of me to be your good
messenger among the Medes with the order from Cyaxares, and I said to
myself that if I did the work well, if I really helped you, I might
become your comrade and have the right to talk with you as often as I
wished. [50] Well, the work was done, and done so as to win your
praise. After that the Hyrcanians joined us, the first friends we
made, when we were hungry and thirsty for allies, and we loved them so
much we almost carried them about with us in our arms wherever we
went. Then the enemy's camp was taken, and I scarcely think you had
the leisure to trouble your head with me--oh, I quite forgave you.
[51] The next thing was that Gobryas became your friend, and I had to
take my leave, and after him Gadatas, and by that time it was a real
task to get hold of you. Then came the alliances with the Sakians, and
the Cadousians, and no doubt you had to pay them court; if they danced
attendance on you, you must dance attendance on them. [52] So that
there I was, back again at my starting-point, and yet all the while,
as I saw you busy with horses and chariots and artillery, I consoled
myself by thinking, 'when he is done with this he will have a little
leisure for me.' And then came the terrible news that the whole world
was gathering in arms against us; I could not deny that these were
important matters, but still I felt certain, if all went well, a time
would come at last when you need not grudge me your company, and we
should be together to my heart's content, you and I. [53] Now, the day
has come; we have conquered in the great battle; we have taken Sardis
and Babylon; the world is at our feet, and yesterday, by Mithras!
unless I had used my fists a hundred times, I swear I could never have
got near you at all. Well, you grasped my hand and gave me greeting,
and bade me wait beside you, and there I waited, the cynosure of every
eye, the envy of every man, standing there all day long, without a
scrap to eat or a drop to drink. [54] So now, if any way can be found
by which we who have served you longest can get the most of you, well
and good: but, if not, pray send me as your messenger once more, and
this time I will tell them they can all leave you, except those who
were your friends of old."

[55] This appeal set them all laughing, Cyrus with the rest. Then
Chrysantas the Persian stood up and spoke as follows:

"Formerly, Cyrus, it was natural and right that you should appear in
public, for the reasons you have given us yourself, and also because
we were not the folk you had to pay your court to. We did not need
inviting: we were with you for our own sakes. It was necessary to win
over the masses by every means, if they were to share our toils and
our dangers willingly. [56] But now you have won them, and not them
alone; you have it in your power to gain others, and the moment has
come when you ought to have a house to yourself. What would your
empire profit you if you alone were left without hearth or home? Man
has nothing more sacred than his home, nothing sweeter, nothing more
truly his. And do you not think," he added, "that we ourselves would
be ashamed if we saw you bearing the hardships of the camp while we
sat at home by our own firesides? Should we not feel we had done you
wrong, and taken advantage of you?"

[57] When Chrysantas had spoken thus, many others followed him, and
all to the same effect. And so it came about that Cyrus entered the
palace, and those in charge brought the treasures from Sardis thither,
and handed them over. And Cyrus when he entered sacrificed to Hestia,
the goddess of the Hearth, and to Zeus the Lord, and to any other gods
named by the Persian priests.

[58] This done, he set himself to regulate the matters that remained.
Thinking over his position, and the attempt he was making to govern an
enormous multitude, preparing at the same time to take up his abode in
the greatest of all famous cities, but yet a city that was as hostile
to him as a city could be, pondering all this, he concluded that he
could not dispense with a bodyguard for himself. [59] He knew well
enough that a man can most easily be assassinated at his meals, or in
his bath, or in bed, or when he is asleep, and he asked himself who
were most to be trusted of those he had about him. A man, he believed,
can never be loyal or trustworthy who is likely to love another more
than the one who requires his guardianship. [60] He knew that men with
children, or wives, or favourites in whom they delight, must needs
love them most: while eunuchs, who are deprived of all such dear ones,
would surely make most account of him who could enrich them, or help
them if they were injured, or crown them with honour. And in the
conferring of such benefits he was disposed to think he could outbid
the world. [61] Moreover the eunuch, being degraded in the eyes of
other men, is driven to seek the assistance of some lord and master.
Without some such protection there is not a man in the world who would
not think he had the right to over-reach a eunuch: while there was
every reason to suppose that the eunuch would be the most faithful of
all servants. [62] As for the customary notion that the eunuch must be
weak and cowardly, Cyrus was not disposed to accept it. He studied the
indications to be observed in animals: a vicious horse, if gelded,
will cease to bite and be restive, but he will charge as gallantly as
ever; a bull that has been cut will become less fierce and less
intractable, but he will not lose his strength, he will be as good as
ever for work; castration may cure a dog of deserting his master, but
it will not ruin him as a watch-dog or spoil him for the chase. [63]
So, too, with men; when cut off from this passion, they become
gentler, no doubt, but not less quick to obey, not less daring as
horsemen, not less skilful with the javelin, not less eager for
honour. [64] In war and in the chase they show plainly enough that the
fire of ambition is still burning in their hearts. And they have stood
the last test of loyalty in the downfall of their masters. No men have
shown more faithfulness than eunuchs when ruin has fallen on their
lords. [65] In bodily strength, perhaps, the eunuchs seem to be
lacking, but steel is a great leveller, and makes the weak man equal
to the strong in war. Holding this in mind, Cyrus resolved that his
personal attendants, from his doorkeepers onwards, should be eunuchs
one and all.

[66] This guard, however, he felt was hardly sufficient against the
multitude of enemies, and he asked himself whom he could choose among
the rest. [67] He remembered how his Persians led the sorriest of
lives at home owing to their poverty, working long and hard on the
niggard soil, and he felt sure they were the men who would most value
the life at his court. [68] Accordingly he selected ten thousand
lancers from among them, to keep guard round the palace, night and
day, whenever he was at home, and to march beside him whenever he went
abroad. [69] Moreover, he felt that Babylon must always have an
adequate garrison, whether he was in the country or not, and therefore
he stationed a considerable body of troops in the city; and he bade
the Babylonians provide their pay, his object being to make the
citizens helpless, and therefore humble and submissive. [70] This
royal guard that he established there, and the city guard for Babylon,
survive to this day unaltered.

Lastly, as he pondered how the whole empire was to be kept together,
and possibly another added to it, he felt convinced that his
mercenaries did not make up for the smallness of their numbers by
their superiority to the subject peoples. Therefore he must keep
together those brave warriors, to whom with heaven's help the victory
was due, and he must take all care that they did not lose their
valour, hardihood, and skill. [71] To avoid the appearance of
dictating to them and to bring it about that they should see for
themselves it was best to stay with him and remember their valour and
their training, he called a council of the Peers and of the leading
men who seemed to him most worthy of sharing their dangers and their
rewards. [72] And when they were met he began:

"Gentlemen, my friends and allies, we owe the utmost thanks to the
gods because they have given us what we believed that we deserved. We
are masters to-day of a great country and a good; and those who till
it will support us; we have houses of our own, and all the furniture
that is in them is ours. [73] For you need not think that what you
hold belongs to others. It is an eternal law the wide world over, that
when a city is taken in war, the citizens, their persons, and all
their property fall into the hands of the conquerors. It is not by
injustice, therefore, that you hold what you have taken, rather it is
through your own human kindness that the citizens are allowed to keep
whatever they do retain.

[74] "Yet I foresee that if we betake ourselves to the life of
indolence and luxury, the life of the degenerate who think that labour
is the worst of evils and freedom from toil the height of happiness,
the day will come, and speedily, when we shall be unworthy of
ourselves, and with the loss of honour will come the loss of wealth.
[75] Once to have been valiant is not enough; no man can keep his
valour unless he watch over it to the end. As the arts decay through
neglect, as the body, once healthy and alert, will grow weak through
sloth and indolence, even so the powers of the spirit, temperance,
self-control, and courage, if we grow slack in training, fall back
once more to rottenness and death. [76] We must watch ourselves; we
must not surrender to the sweetness of the day. It is a great work,
methinks, to found an empire, but a far greater to keep it safe. To
seize it may be the fruit of daring and daring only, but to hold it is
impossible without self-restraint and self-command and endless care.
[77] We must not forget this; we must train ourselves in virtue from
now henceforward with even greater diligence than before we won this
glory, remembering that the more a man possesses, the more there are
to envy him, to plot against him, and be his enemies, above all when
the wealth he wins and the services he receives are yielded by
reluctant hands. But the gods, we need not doubt, will be upon our
side; we have not triumphed through injustice; we were not the
aggressors, it was we who were attacked and we avenged ourselves. [78]
The gods are with us, I say; but next to that supreme support there is
a defence we must provide out of our own powers alone; and that is the
righteous claim to rule our subjects because we are better men than
they. Needs must that we share with our slaves in heat and cold and
food and drink and toil and slumber, and we must strive to prove our
superiority even in such things as these, and first in these. [79] But
in the science of war and the art of it we can admit no share; those
whom we mean to make our labourers and our tributaries can have no
part in that; we will set ourselves to defraud them there; we know
that such exercises are the very tools of freedom and happiness, given
by the gods to mortal men. We have taken their arms away from our
slaves, and we must never lay our own aside, knowing well that the
nearer the sword-hilt the closer the heart's desire. So. Does any man
ask himself what profit he has gained from the fulfilment of his
dreams, if he must still endure, still undergo hunger and thirst and
toil and trouble and care? Let him learn the lesson that a man's
enjoyment of all good things is in exact proportion to the pains he
has undergone to gain them. Toil is the seasoning of delight; without
desire and longing, no dish, however costly, could be sweet. [81] Yes,
if some spirit were to set before us what men desire most, and we were
left to add for ourselves that final touch of sweetness, I say that we
could only gain above the poorest of the poor in so far as we could
bring hunger for the most delicious foods, and thirst for the richest
wines, and weariness to make us woo the deepest slumber. [82]
Therefore, we must strain every nerve to win and to keep manhood and
nobleness; so that we may gain that satisfaction which is the sweetest
and the best, and be saved from the bitterest of sorrows; since to
fail of good altogether is not so hard as to lose the good that has
once been ours. [83] And let us ask ourselves what excuse we could
offer for being unworthy of our past. Shall we say it is because we
have won an empire? Surely it is hardly fitting that the ruler should
be baser than the ruled. Or is it that we seem to be happier to-day
than heretofore? Is cowardice, then, an adjunct of happiness? Or is it
simply because we have slaves and must punish them if they do wrong?
But by what right can a man, who is bad himself, punish others for
badness or stupidity? [84] Remember, too, that we have arranged for
the maintenance of a whole multitude, to guard our persons and our
houses, and it would be shameful for us to depend for safety on the
weapons of others and refuse to carry weapons for ourselves. Surely we
ought to know that there can be no defence so strong as a man's own
gallantry. Courage should be our companion all our days. For if virtue
leave us, nothing else whatever can go well with us. [85] What, then,
would I have you do? How are we to remember our valour and train our
skill? Gentlemen, I have nothing novel to suggest; at home in Persia
the Peers spend their days at the public buildings and here we should
do the same. Here we are the men of rank and honour, as we are there,
and we should hold to the same customs. You must keep your eyes on me
and watch whether I am diligent in my duty, and I shall give heed to
you, and honour him who trains himself in what is beautiful and brave.
[86] And here too let us educate our sons, if sons are born to us. We
cannot but become better ourselves if we strive to set the best
example we can to our children, and our children could hardly grow up
to be unworthy, even if they wished, when they see nothing base before
them, and hear nothing shameful, but live in the practice of all that
is beautiful and good."


NOTES

C1. Notice the epic tone now adopted, or rather swum into, or rather
which floats the writer up of its own motion.

C1.2 ff. On the whole this description of the battle is, for Xenophon,
obscure.

C1.5-6. Xenophon, Artist. This military criticism and technical
discussion juxtaposed to the epic prelude and the epic sequel is a
clever device enough. We are pleased.

C1.8-9. Final injunctions somewhat obscure, I think.

C1.24 ff. The epic and Homeric vein.

C1.33. The Egyptians have the advantage. This is noticeable in
reference to Cyrus' criticisms of their arms before battle. That is
not a slip, but a dramatic touch on the part of the author, I think.
And Cyrus is speaking of cavalry there, and anticipates the result.

C1.34 fin. A singular feature this in ancient battles. Is it simply
and solely Oriental, or general, and Hellenic also? Has it any
analogue nowadays anywhere? Probably with Egyptian troops in the
Soudan it has (hgd. 1884).

C2.6-7. The archic man through an act of bad discipline makes good
discipline more acceptable.

C2.13. The civilised method of dealing with a conquered city. Instead
of pillage and rapine, an indemnity, which will bring in to the
conquerors wealth, and yet not destroy the arts of the population,
which are the fountain-heads of beauty. || Modern. So the archic man
asserts his superiority once more.

C2.24. Is this also Xenophon's view? If so, it throws light on his
theory of rank and caste.

C3.2. Curious Cyrus should be so little suspicious of Abradatas'
death, is it not? Because the victory was not bloodless. Notice, too,
how little is said of the bloodshed; that is Hellenic as well as
Xenophontine, I fancy.

C3.7. Something epic in all this. Cf. Archilles sacrificing at the
tomb of Patroklos.

C3.8 ff. The pathos of the situation and the /Eironeia/ at its
maximum. "Euripidean" touches throughout.

C3.16. [This is bracketed in most editions, no doubt rightly, as an
interpolation. It was not translated in Mr. Dakyns' manuscript, but
his marginal note is characteristic, and evidently he would have
translated the section in a footnote. It may be rendered thus: "It is
said that a monument was raised above the eunuchs and is in existence
to this day. On the upper slab the names of the husband and the wife
are written in Syrian letters, and below are three other slabs,
inscribed 'To the chamberlains.'"]

C3.16. Interesting, especially if of later insertion, and perhaps
given the historical basis of the story in some monument on the
Pactolus, known to Xenophon. I wish a new Schliemann would find it.
hgd.

C4. Semi-historical? The version is to be found, I think, in C4.2,
which is the /pice justicative/. The episode itself is full of
humour, as good as a play: Xenophon has seen these duplicities often.
Brer Fox outwitted by Brer Rabbit.

C4.4. Can these rival fastnesses of the Carians be identified? All
this country is well known to Xenophon (/vide Hellenica/, III. c. 4,
etc.).

C4.6. Beautiful renewal of the peaceful arts, festivals, and merry-
makings after the internecine party strife.

C4.9. This again is a district Xenophon is well acquainted with. Has
he one eye on the old insurrection against Persia, /tempore/
Histiaeus, and another on the new arrangements, /tempore/ Antalcidas?

C4.12-13. Croesus and his bills of lading. Some humour. It also brings
out the archic man in opposition to the shop-keeper man of the mere
business type. But still the bills of lading are needed. Croesus only
doesn't "twig" the right persons to check. It's the opposition between
Despot and true Ruler.

C5.9. Cyrus has an idea, the nature of which we shall discover later.

C5.15. Belshazzar's feast, /vide/ Daniel, cf. Hdt. Why plural, "the
trenches"? Is Xenophon obscure? His obscurity is mostly this: he
expects his reader intelligently to follow him.

C5.32. Jars somewhat on our feelings, perhaps, in its thirst for
revenge: but cf. the feeling against the assassins of Lord Frederick
Cavendish and Mr. Burke. [Written at the time of the Phoenix Park
murders.]

C5.37. Is a turning-point in the rise of the archic man (and yet
hardly yet, but at C5.58 we shall come to bodyguards and eunuchs). At
this highest pinnacle of {arkhe} Cyrus desires to furnish himself as
befits a king. It is an historical difficulty which Xenophon has to
get over or round, or is Xenophon himself in the same condemnation, so
to speak? Does he also desire his archic man to be got up in a manner
befitting royalty at a certain date? Consider.

C5.42-47. These sections pose the difficulty well, and it is a
difficulty, and no mistake.

C5.42 ff.  Xenophon-Hellenic theory of life. The leisure to invite
one's own soul and see one's friends which is needed to make life
worth living, versus /negotia/, /negotia/, /negotia/. How far are we
to be consciously self-regarding? Cyrus versus Buddha. The Hellenic
hero is not equal to absolute non-self-regarding devotion to mere
work. The Buddha might be.

C5.48. Perhaps nothing is cleverer in the neat and skilful mosaic work
of this composition than the fitting-in here of Artabazus' personal
view with the--at last necessary--impersonal or public theory of
leadership. It is pretty also that Artabazus should at length get his
reward, and humorous that he doesn't, after all, get it in the old
form.

C5.49 ff. He keenly remembers each tantalizing moment of approach and
separation. A splendid speech of the humorous type. Xenophon himself
must be credited with so much fun, and real fun it is.

C5.56 ff. Curious on this page (a) Xenophon's domestic hearth theory
without which {arkhe} is a tinkling cymbal and empire no burthen to be
borne. His feeling for the sweetness of home || modern. In this the
secret of his happiness, || hgd. (b) His /justification/ or /raison
d'tre/ explanation of the eunuch system. Why doesn't he point out its
hollowness also? Not from any lack of sympathy with this barren
mankind. Cf. Gadatas. I think this all logically follows if the
{arkhon} is to rule political enemies as well as friends: to do so
{epistamenos} ["asian expert"] some strange devices must be resorted
to--what think you, Dakyns?

C5.58. The need of a bodyguard. The dragon-fly must wing his flight in
armour cased: that is the law of his development. So Cyrus must be in
the end an ideal "tyrannus," the one spoken of by Simonides the poet
to Hiero [/vide/ the dialogue /Hiero/, and the notes thereto in Mr.
Dakyns' translation, Vol. III.].

C5.64. The faithfulness of the eunuch has its parallel in that of the
old negro slave.

C5.67. These are the sort of fellows Xenophon would have chosen
himself, I take it. Again the historical basis has to be taken account
of. Xenophon has to explain to himself the existence of their body and
how the archic man came to invent it. Throughout we must compare the
/Hiero/ for Xenophon's own political theory apart from his romantic
and philosophical interest in Cyrus.

C5.69. Not a pleasant picture of subject and ruling race. Cf. the
Austrians in Italy.

C5.73. The Hellenic || the modern theory, but more rudely expressed.
The conquerors right to the land he has taken, and what Cyrus proceeds
to say is quite up to the modern mark.

C5.74. Of course this is precisely what the Persians as they
degenerated did come to, nor did the good example of the archic man
nor his precepts nor his institutions save them.

C5.77-79. "Military" theory of virtue: almost barbaric (/ex mea
sententia/ hgd.). But Xenophon is not absolutely = Cyrus.

C5.80 ff. This is the Socratico-Xenophontine hedonism-and-stoicism
combined.

C5.82 ff. A noble sermon on the need of straining every nerve to
virtuous training. Splendidly rhetorical and forceful.

C5.84. Cyrus (i.e. Xenophon) is aware of the crisis he and his are
going through. If externalism has to be adopted to hedge royalty,
still a further inner change is demanded: there must be a
corresponding spiritual growth.

C5.86. One of the noblest sayings in all Xenophon. The one somehow
which touches me most. The best way to improve ourselves is to see
that we set our boys the best examples.



BOOK VIII

[C.1] Such were the words of Cyrus; and Chrysantas rose up after him,
saying, "Gentlemen, this is not the first time I have had occasion to
observe that a good ruler differs in no respect from a good father.
Even as a father takes thought that blessings may never fail his
children, so Cyrus would commend to us the ways by which we can
preserve our happiness. And yet, on one point, it seemed to me he had
spoken less fully than he might; and I will try to explain it for the
benefit of those who have not learnt it. [2] I would have you ask
yourselves, was ever a hostile city captured by an undisciplined
force? Did ever an undisciplined garrison save a friendly town? When
discipline was gone, did ever an army conquer? Is ever disaster nearer
than when each solider thinks about his private safety only? Nay, in
peace as in war, can any good be gained if men will not obey their
betters? What city could be at rest, lawful, and orderly? What
household could be safe? What ship sail home to her haven? [3] And we,
to what do we owe our triumph, if not to our obedience? We obeyed; we
were ready to follow the call by night and day; we marched behind our
leader, ranks that nothing could resist; we left nothing half-done of
all we were told to do. If obedience is the one path to win the
highest good, remember it is also the one way to preserve it. [4] Now
in the old days, doubtless, many of us ruled no one else, we were
simply ruled. But to-day you find yourselves rulers, one and all of
you, some over many and some over few. And just as you would wish your
subjects to obey you, so we must obey those who are set over us. Yet
there should be this difference between ourselves and slaves; a slave
renders unwilling service to his lord, but we, if we claim to be
freemen, must do of our own free will that which we see to be the
best. And you will find," he added, "that even when no single man is
ruler, that city which is most careful to obey authority is the last
to bow to the will of her enemies. [5] Let us listen to the words of
Cyrus. Let us gather round the public buildings and train ourselves,
so that we may keep our hold on all we care for, and offer ourselves
to Cyrus for his noble ends. Of one thing we may be sure: Cyrus will
never put us to any service which can make for his own good and not
for ours. Our needs are the same as his, and our foes the same."

[6] When Chrysantas had said his say, many others followed to support
him, Persians and allies alike, and it was agreed that the men of rank
and honour should be in attendance continually at the palace gates,
ready for Cyrus to employ, until he gave them their dismissal. That
custom is still in force, and to this day the Asiatics under the Great
King wait at the door of their rulers. [7] And the measures that Cyrus
instituted to preserve his empire, as set forth in this account, are
still the law of the land, maintained by all the kings who followed
him. [8] Only as in other matters, so here; with a good ruler, the
government is pure; with a bad one, corrupt. Thus it came about that
the nobles of Cyrus and all his honourable men waited at his gates,
with their weapons and their horses, according to the common consent
of the gallant men who had helped to lay the empire at his feet.

[9] Then Cyrus turned to other matters, and appointed various
overseers: he had receivers of revenue, controllers of finance,
ministers of works, guardians of property, superintendents of the
household. Moreover, he chose managers for his horses and his dogs,
men who could be trusted to keep the creatures in the best condition
and ready for use at any moment. [10] But when it came to those who
were to be his fellow-guardians for the commonwealth, he would not
leave the care and the training of these to others; he regarded that
as his own personal task. He knew, if he were ever to fight a battle,
he would have to choose his comrades and supporters, the men on his
right hand and left, from these and these alone; it was from them he
must appoint his officers for horse and foot. [11] If he had to send
out a general alone it would be from them that one must be sent: he
must depend on them for satraps and governors over cities and nations;
he would require them for ambassadors, and an embassy was, he knew,
the best means for obtaining what he wanted without war. [12] He
foresaw that nothing could go well if the agents in his weightiest
affairs were not what they ought to be, while, if they were,
everything would prosper. This charge, therefore, he took upon his own
shoulders, and he was persuaded that the training he demanded of
others should also be undergone by himself. No man could rouse others
to noble deeds if he fell short of what he ought to be himself. [13]
The more he pondered the matter, the more he felt the need of leisure,
if he were to deal worthily with the highest matters. It was, he felt,
impossible to neglect the revenues, in view of the enormous funds
necessary for so vast an empire, yet he foresaw that if he was always
to be occupied with the multitude of his possessions he would never
have time to watch over the safety of the whole. [14] As he pondered
how he could compass both objects, the prosperity of the finances and
the leisure he required, the old military organisation came into his
mind. He remembered how the captains of ten supervised the squads of
ten, and were supervised themselves by the company-captains, and they
by the captains of the thousands, and these by the captains of ten
thousand, and thus even with hundreds of thousands not a man was left
without supervision, and when the general wished to employ his troops
one order to the captains of ten thousand was enough. [15] On this
principle Cyrus arranged his finances and held his departments
together; in this way, by conferring with a few officers he could keep
the whole system under his control, and actually have more leisure for
himself than the manager of a single household or the master of a
single ship. Finally, having thus ordered his own affairs, he taught
those about him to adopt the same system.

[16] Accordingly, having gained the leisure he needed for himself and
his friends, he could devote himself to his work of training his
partners and colleagues. In the first place he dealt with those who,
enabled as they were to live on the labour of others, yet failed to
present themselves at the palace; he would send for them and seek them
out, convinced that attendance would be wholesome for them; they would
be unwilling to do anything base or evil in the presence of their king
and under the eye of their noblest men; those who were absent were so
through self-indulgence or wrong-doing or carelessness. [17] And I
will now set forth how he brought them to attend. He would go to one
of his most intimate friends and bid him lay hands on the property of
the offender, asserting that it was his own. Then of course the
truants would appear at once crying out that they had been robbed.
[18] But somehow for many days Cyrus could never find leisure to hear
their complaints, and when he did listen he took care to defer
judgment for many more. [19] This was one way he had of teaching them
to attend; another was to assign the lightest and most profitable
tasks to those who were punctual, and a third to give nothing whatever
to the offenders. [20] But the most effective of all, for those who
paid no heed to gentler measures, was to deprive the truant of what he
possessed and bestow it on him who would come when he was needed. By
this process Cyrus gave up a useless friend and gained a serviceable
one. To this day the king sends for and seeks out those who do not
present themselves when they should.

[21] Such was his method with the truants; with those who came forward
he felt, since he was their rightful leader, that he could best incite
them to noble deeds by trying to show that he himself had all the
virtues that became a man. [22] He believed that men do grow better
through written laws, and he held that the good ruler is a living law
with eyes that see, inasmuch as he is competent to guide and also to
detect the sinner and chastise him. [23] Thus he took pains to show
that he was the more assiduous in his service to the gods the higher
his fortunes rose. It was at this time that the Persian priests, the
Magians, were first established as an order, and always at break of
day Cyrus chanted a hymn and sacrificed to such of the gods as they
might name. [24] And the ordinances he established service to this day
at the court of the reigning king. These were the first matters in
which the Persians set themselves to copy their prince; feeling their
own fortune would be the higher if they did reverence to the gods,
following the man who was fortune's favourite and their own monarch.
At the same time, no doubt, they thought they would please Cyrus by
this. [25] On his side Cyrus looked on the piety of his subjects as a
blessing to himself, reckoning as they do who prefer to sail in the
company of pious men rather than with those who are suspected of
wicked deeds, and he reckoned further that if all his partners were
god-fearing, they would be the less prone to crime against each other
or against himself, for he knew he was the benefactor of his fellows.
[26] And by showing plainly his own deep desire never to be unfair to
friend or fellow-combatant or ally, but always to fix his eyes on
justice and rectitude, he believed he could induce others to keep from
base actions and walk in the paths of righteousness. [27] And he would
bring more modesty, he hoped, into the hearts of all men if it were
plain that he himself reverenced all the world and would never say a
shameful word to any man or woman or do a shameful deed. [28] He
looked for this because he saw that, apart from kings and governors
who may be supposed to inspire fear, men will reverence the modest and
not the shameless, and modesty in women will inspire modesty in the
men who behold them. [29] And his people, he thought, would learn to
obey if it were plain that he honoured frank and prompt obedience even
above virtues that made a grander show and were harder to attain. [30]
Such was his belief, and his practice went with it to the end. His own
temperance and the knowledge of it made others more temperate. When
they saw moderation and self-control in the man who above all others
had licence to be insolent, lesser men were the more ready to abjure
all insolence of their own. [31] But there was this difference, Cyrus
held, between modesty and self-control: the modest man will do nothing
shameful in the light of day, but the man of self-control nothing
base, not even in secret. [32] Self-restrain, he believed, would best
be cultivated if he made men see in himself one who could not be
dragged from the pursuit of virtue by the pleasure of the moment, one
who chose to toil first for the happy-hearted joys that go hand-in-
hand with beauty and nobleness. [33] Thus, being the man he was, he
established at his gates a stately company, where the lower gave place
to the higher, and they in their turn showed reverence to each other,
and courtesy, and perfect harmony. Among them all there was never a
cry of anger to be heard, nor a burst of insolent laughter; to look at
them was to know that they lived for honour and loveliness.

[34] Such was the life at the palace-gates, and to practise his nobles
in martial exercises he would lead them out to the hunt whenever he
thought it well, holding the chase to be the best training for war and
the surest way to excellence in horsemanship. [35] A man learns to
keep his seat, no matter what the ground may be, as he follows the
flying quarry, learns to hurl and strike on horseback in his eagerness
to bring down the game and win applause. [36] And here, above all, was
the field in which to inure his colleagues to toil and hardship and
cold and heat and hunger and thirst. Thus to this day the Persian
monarch and his court spend their leisure in the chase. [37] From all
that has been said, it is clear Cyrus was convinced that no one has a
right to rule who is not superior to his subjects, and he held that by
imposing such exercises as these on those about him, he would lead
them to self-control and bring to perfection the art and discipline of
war. [38] Accordingly he would put himself at the head of the hunting-
parties and take them out himself unless he was bound to stay at home,
and, if he was, he would hunt in his parks among the wild creatures he
had reared. He would never touch the evening meal himself until he had
sweated for it, nor give his horses their corn until they had been
exercised, and he would invite his own mace-bearers to join him in the
chase. [39] Therefore he excelled in all knightly accomplishments, he
and those about him, because of their constant practice. Such was the
example he set before his friends. But he also kept his eye on others,
and would single out those who worshipped noble deeds, and reward them
with gifts, and high commands, and seats at festivals, and every kind
of honour. And thus their hearts were filled with ambition, and every
man longed to outdo his fellows in the eyes of Cyrus.

[40] But we seem to learn also that Cyrus thought it necessary for the
ruler not only to surpass his subjects by his own native worth, but
also to charm them through deception and artifice. At any rate he
adopted the Median dress, and persuaded his comrades to do likewise;
he thought it concealed any bodily defect, enhancing the beauty and
stature of the wearer. [41] The shoe, for instance, was so devised
that a sole could be added without notice, and the man would seem
taller than he really was. So also Cyrus encouraged the use of
ointments to make the eyes more brilliant and pigments to make the
skin look fairer. [42] And he trained his courtiers never to spit or
blow the nose in public or turn aside to stare at anything; they were
to keep the stately air of persons whom nothing can surprise. These
were all means to one end; to make it impossible for the subjects to
despise their rulers.

[43] Thus he moulded the men he considered worthy of command by his
own example, by the training he gave them, and by the dignity of his
own leadership. But the treatment of those he prepared for slavery was
widely different. Not one of them would he incite to any noble toil,
he would not even let them carry arms, and he was careful that they
should never lack food or drink in any manly sort. [44] When the
beaters drove the wild creatures into the plain he would allow food to
be brought for the servants, but not for the free men; on a march he
would lead the slaves to the water-springs as he led the beasts of
burden. Or when it was the hour of breakfast he would wait himself
till they had taken a snatch of food and stayed their wolfish hunger;
and the end of it was they called him their father even as the nobles
did, because he cared for them, but the object of his care was to keep
them slaves for ever.

[45] Thus he secured the safety of the Persian empire. He himself, he
felt sure, ran no danger from the massages of the conquered people; he
saw they had no courage, no unity, and no discipline, and, moreover,
not one of them could ever come near him, day or night. [46] But there
were others whom he knew to be true warriors, who carried arms, and
who held by one another, commanders of horse and foot, many of them
men of spirit, confident, as he could plainly see, of their own power
to rule, men who were in close touch with his own guards, and many
of them in constant intercourse with himself; as indeed was essential
if he was to make any use of them at all. It was from them that danger
was to be feared; and that in a thousand ways. [47] How was he to
guard against it? He rejected the idea of disarming them; he thought
this unjust, and that it would lead to the dissolution of the empire.
To refuse them admission into his presence, to show them his distrust,
would be, he considered, a declaration of war. [48] But there was one
method, he felt, worth all the rest, an honourable method and one that
would secure his safety absolutely; to win their friendship if he
could, and make them more devoted to himself than to each other. I
will now endeavour to set forth the methods, so far as I conceive
them, by which he gained their love.

[C.2] In the first place he never lost an opportunity of showing
kindliness wherever he could, convinced that just as it is not easy to
love those who hate us, so it is scarcely possible to feel enmity for
those who love us and wish us well. [2] So long as he had lacked the
power to confer benefits by wealth, all he could do then was to show
his personal care for his comrades and his soldiers, to labour in
their behalf, manifest his joy in their good fortune and his sympathy
in their sorrows, and try to win them in that way. But when the time
came for the gifts of wealth, he realised that of all the kindnesses
between man and man none come with a more natural grace than the gifts
of meat and drink. [3] Accordingly he arranged that his table should
be spread every day for many guests in exactly the same way as for
himself; and all that was set before him, after he and his guests had
dined, he would send out to his absent friends, in token of affection
and remembrance. He would include those who had won his approval by
their work on guard, or in attendance on himself, or in any other
service, letting them see that no desire to please him could ever
escape his eyes. [4] He would show the same honour to any servant he
wished to praise; and he had all the food for them placed at his own
board, believing this would win their fidelity, as it would a dog's.
Or, if he wished some friend of his to be courted by the people, he
would single him out for such gifts; even to this day the world will
pay court to those who have dishes sent them from the Great King's
table, thinking they must be in high favour at the palace and can get
things done for others. But no doubt there was another reason for the
pleasure in such gifts, and that was the sheer delicious taste of the
royal meats. [5] Nor should that surprise us; for if we remember to
what a pitch of perfection the other crafts are brought in great
communities, we ought to expect the royal dishes to be wonders of
finished art. In a small city the same man must make beds and chairs
and ploughs and tables, and often build houses as well; and indeed he
will be only too glad if he can find enough employers in all trades to
keep him. Now it is impossible that a single man working at a dozen
crafts can do them all well; but in the great cities, owing to the
wide demand for each particular thing, a single craft will suffice for
a means of livelihood, and often enough even a single department of
that; there are shoe-makers who will only make sandals for men and
others only for women. Or one artisan will get his living merely by
stitching shoes, another by cutting them out, a third by shaping the
upper leathers, and a fourth will do nothing but fit the parts
together. Necessarily the man who spends all his time and trouble on
the smallest task will do that task the best. [6] The arts of the
household must follow the same law. If one and the same servant makes
the bed, spreads the table, kneads the dough, and cooks the various
dishes, the master must take things as they come, there is no help for
it. But when there is work enough for one man to boil the pot, and
another to roast the meat, and a third to stew the fish, and a fourth
to fry it, while some one else must bake the bread, and not all of it
either, for the loaves must be of different kinds, and it will be
quite enough if the baker can serve up one kind to perfection--it is
obvious, I think, that in this way a far higher standard of excellence
will be attained in every branch of the work.

[7] Thus it is easy to see how Cyrus could outdo all competitors in
the grace of hospitality, and I will now explain how he came to
triumph in all other services. Far as he excelled mankind in the scale
of his revenues, he excelled them even more in the grandeur of his
gifts. It was Cyrus who set the fashion; and we are familiar to this
day with the open-handedness of Oriental kings. [8] There is no one,
indeed, in all the world whose friends are seen to be as wealthy as
the friends of the Persian monarch: no one adorns his followers in
such splendour of rich attire, no gifts are so well known as his, the
bracelets, and the necklaces, and the chargers with the golden
bridles. For in that country no one can have such treasures unless the
king has given them. [9] And of whom but the Great King could it be
said that through the splendour of his presents he could steal the
hearts of men and turn them to himself, away from brothers, fathers,
sons? Who but he could stretch out an arm and take vengeance on his
enemies when yet they were months and months away? Who but Cyrus ever
won an empire in war, and when he died was called father by the people
he overcame?--a title that proclaims the benefactor and not the
robber. [10] Indeed, we are led to think that the offices called "the
king's eyes" and "the king's ears" came into being through this system
of gifts and honours. Cyrus' munificence toward all who told him what
it was well for him to know set countless people listening with all
their ears and watching with all their eyes for news that might be of
service to him. [11] Thus there sprang up a host of "king's eyes" and
"king's ears," as they were called, known and reputed to be such. But
it is a mistake to suppose that the king has one chosen "eye." It is
little that one man can see or one man hear, and to hand over the
office to one single person would be to bid all others go to sleep.
Moreover, his subjects would feel they must be on their guard before
the man they knew was "the king's eye." The contrary is the case; the
king will listen to any man who asserts that he has heard or seen
anything that needs attention. [12] Hence the saying that the king has
a thousand eyes and a thousand ears; and hence the fear of uttering
anything against his interest since "he is sure to hear," or doing
anything that might injure him "since he may be there to see." So far,
therefore, from venturing to breathe a syllable against Cyrus, every
man felt that he was under the eye and within the hearing of a king
who was always present. For this universal feeling towards him I can
give no other reason than his resolve to be a benefactor on a most
mighty scale.

[13] It is not surprising, no doubt, that being the wealthiest of men,
he could outdo the world in the splendour of his gifts. The remarkable
thing was to find a king outstrip his courtiers in courtesy and
kindness. There was nothing, so the story runs, that could ever shame
him more than to be outdone in courtesy. [14] Indeed, a saying of his
is handed down comparing a good king to a good shepherd--the shepherd
must manage his flock by giving them all they need, and the king must
satisfy the needs of his cities and his subjects if he is to manage
them. We need not wonder, then, that with such opinions his ambition
was to excel mankind in courtesy and care. [15] There was a noble
illustration of his philosophy in the answer we are told he gave to
Croesus, who had taken him to task, saying his lavish gifts would
bring him to beggary, although he could lay by more treasures for
himself than any man had ever had before. Cyrus, it is said, asked him
in return, "How much wealth do you suppose I could have amassed
already, had I collected gold, as you bid me, ever since I came into
my empire?"

[16] And Croesus named an enormous sum. Then Cyrus said, "Listen,
Croesus, here is my friend, Hystaspas, and you must send with him a
man that you can trust." Then, turning to Hystaspas, "Do you," he
said, "go round to my friends and tell them that I need money for a
certain enterprise--and that is true, I do need it. Bid each of them
write down the amount he can give me, seal the letter, and hand it to
the messenger of Croesus, who will bring it here." [17] Thereupon
Cyrus wrote his wishes and put his seal on the letter, and gave it to
Hystaspas to carry round, only he added a request that they should all
welcome Hystaspas as a friend of his. And when the messengers came
back, the officer of Croesus carrying the answers, Hystaspas cried,
"Cyrus, my lord, you must know I am a rich man now! I have made my
fortune, thanks to your letter! They have loaded me with gifts." [18]
And Cyrus said, "There, Croesus, that is treasure number one; and now
run through the rest, and count what sums I have in hand, in case I
need them." And Croesus counted, and found, so the story tells us,
that the sum was far larger than the amount he had said would have
been lying in the treasury if only Cyrus had made a hoard. [19] At
this discovery Cyrus said, so we are told, "You see, Croesus, I have
my treasures too. Only you advise me to collect them and hide them,
and be envied and hated because of them, and set mercenaries to guard
them, putting my trust in hirelings. But I hold to it that if I make
my friends rich they will be my treasures themselves, and far better
guards too, for me and all we have, than if I set hired watchmen over
my wealth. [20] And I have somewhat else to say; I tell you, Croesus,
there is something the gods have implanted in our souls, and there
they have made us all beggars alike, something I can never overcome.
[21] I too, like all the rest, am insatiate of riches, only in one
respect I fancy I am different. Most men when they have more wealth
than they require bury some of it underground, and let some of it rot,
and some they count and measure, and they guard it and they air it,
and give themselves a world of trouble, and yet for all their wealth
they cannot eat more than they have stomach for--they would burst
asunder if they did--nor wear more clothes than they can carry--they
would die of suffocation--and so their extra wealth means nothing but
extra work. [22] For my part, I serve the gods, and I stretch out my
hands for more and more; only when I have got what is beyond my own
requirements I piece out the wants of my friends, and so, helping my
fellows, I purchase their love and their goodwill, and out of these I
garner security and renown, fruits that can never rot, rich meats that
can work no mischief; for glory, the more it grows, the grander it
becomes, and the fairer, and the lighter to be borne; it even gives a
lighter step to those who bear it. [23] One thing more, Croesus, I
would have you know; the happiest men, in my judgment, are not the
holders of vast riches and the masters who have the most to guard;
else the sentinels of our citadels would be the happiest of mortals,
seeing they guard the whole wealth of the state. He, I hold, has won
the crown of happiness who has had the skill to gain wealth by the
paths of righteousness and use it for all that is honourable and
fair."

[24] That was the doctrine Cyrus preached, and all men could see that
his practice matched his words.

Moreover, he observed that the majority of mankind, if they live in
good health for long, will only lay by such stores and requisites as
may be used by a healthy man, and hardly care at all to have
appliances at hand in case of sickness. But Cyrus was at the pains to
provide these; he encouraged the ablest physicians of the day by his
liberal payments, and if ever they recommended an instrument or a drug
or a special kind of food or drink, he never failed to procure it and
have it stored in the palace.

[25] And whenever any one fell sick among those who had peculiar
claims on his attentions, he would visit them and bring them all they
needed, and he showed especial gratitude to the doctors if they cured
their patients by the help of his own stores. [26] These measures, and
others like them, he adopted to win the first place in the hearts of
those whose friendship he desired. Moreover, the contests he
proclaimed and the prizes he offered to awaken ambition and desire for
gallant deeds all redounded to his own glory as a man who had the
pursuit of nobleness at heart, while they bred strife and bitter
rivalry among the champions themselves. [27] Further, he laid it down
that in every matter needing arbitration, whether it were a suit-at-
law or a trial of skill, the parties should concur in their choice of
a judge. Each would try to secure the most powerful man he knew and
the one most friendly to himself, and if he lost he envied his
successful rival and hated the judge who had declared against him,
while the man who won claimed to win because his case was just and
felt he owed no gratitude to anybody. [28] Thus all who wished to be
first in the affections of Cyrus, just as others in democratic states,
were full of rancour against each other, in fact most of them would
sooner have seen their rivals exterminated than join with them for any
common good. Such are some of the devices by which he made the ablest
of his subjects more attached to himself than to one another.

[C.3] I will now describe the first public progress that Cyrus made.
For the very solemnity of the ceremony was one of the artifices by
which he won reverence for his government. The day before it he
summoned the officers of state, the Persians and the others, and gave
them all the splendid Median dress. This was the first time the
Persians wore it, and as they received the robes he said that he
wished to drive in his chariot to the sacred precincts and offer
sacrifice with them. [2] "You will present yourselves at my gates," he
added, "before the sun rises, attired in these robes, and you will
take your places where Pheraulas the Persian bids you on my behalf. As
soon as I lead the way you will follow in your appointed order. And if
any of you should think of some change to heighten the beauty and
stateliness of our procession, you will acquaint me with it, I pray,
on our return; it is for us to see that all is done in the manner you
feel to be most beautiful and best."

[3] With that Cyrus gave the most splendid robes to his chief
notables, and then he brought out others, for he had stores of Median
garments, purple and scarlet and crimson and glowing red, and gave a
share to each of his generals and said to them, "Adorn your friends,
as I have adorned you." [4] Then one of them asked him, "And you, O
Cyrus, when will you adorn yourself?" But he answered, "Is it not
adornment enough for me to have adorned you? If I can but do good to
my friends, I shall look glorious enough, whatever robe I wear."

[5] So his nobles took their leave, and sent for their friends and put
the splendid raiment on them. Meanwhile Cyrus summoned Pheraulas,
knowing that, while he was a man of the people, he was also quick-
witted, a lover of the beautiful, prompt to understand and to obey,
and one who had ever an eye to please his master. It was he who had
supported Cyrus long ago when he proposed that honour should be given
in proportion to desert. And now Cyrus asked him how he thought the
procession might be made most beautiful in the eyes of friends and
most formidable in the sight of foes. [6] So they took counsel and
were of the same mind, and Cyrus bade Pheraulas see that all was done
on the morrow as they had agreed.

"I have issued orders," he added, "for all to obey you in the matter,
but to make them the more willing, take these tunics yourself and give
them to the captains of the guard, and these military cloaks for the
cavalry officers, and these tunics for those who command the
chariots."

[7] So Pheraulas took the raiment and departed, and when the generals
saw him, they met him with shouts and cries, "A monstrous fine fellow
you are, Pheraulas!" said one: "you are to give us our orders, it
seems!"

"Oh, yes," said Pheraulas, "and carry your baggage too. Here I come
with two cloaks as it is, one for you and another for somebody else:
you must choose whichever you like the best."

[8] At that the officer put out his hand to take the cloak; he had
clean forgotten his jealousy, and fell to asking Pheraulas which he
had better choose. And Pheraulas gave his advice, adding, "But if you
inform against me, and let out that I gave you the choice, the next
time I have to wait upon you you will find me a very different sort of
serving-man."

Thus he distributed the gifts he brought, and then he saw to the
arrangements for the procession so that everything should be as far as
possible.

[9] On the morrow all things were ready before day-break, ranks lining
the road on either hand, as they do to this day when the king is
expected to ride abroad--no one may pass within the lines unless he is
a man of mark--and constables were posted with whips, to use at any
sign of disturbance.

In front of the palace stood the imperial guard of lancers, four
thousand strong, drawn up four deep on either side of the gates. [10]
And all the cavalry were there, the men standing beside their horses,
with their hands wrapped in their cloaks, as is the custom to this day
for every subject when the king's eye is on him. The Persians stood on
the right, and the allies on the left, and the chariots were posted in
the same way, half on one side and half on the other. [11] Presently
the palace-gates were flung open, and at the head of the procession
were led out the bulls for sacrifice, beautiful creatures, four and
four together. They were to be offered to Zeus and to any other gods
that the Persian priests might name. For the Persians think it of more
importance to follow the guidance of the learned in matters pertaining
to the gods than in anything else whatever.

[12] After the oxen came horses, an offering to the Sun, then a white
chariot with a golden yoke, hung with garlands and dedicated to Zeus,
and after that the white car of the Sun, wreathed like the one before
it, and then a third chariot, the horses of which were caparisoned
with scarlet trappings, and behind walked men carrying fire upon a
mighty hearth. [13] And then at last Cyrus himself was seen, coming
forth from the gates in his chariot, wearing his tiara on his head,
and a purple tunic shot with white, such as none but the king may
wear, and trews of scarlet, and a cloak of purple. Round his tiara he
wore a diadem, and his kinsmen wore the same, even as the custom is to
this day. [14] And the king's hands hung free outside his cloak.
Beside him stood a charioteer--he was a tall man, but he seemed to be
dwarfed by Cyrus; whether it was really so, or whether there was some
artifice at work, Cyrus towered above him. At the sight of the king,
the whole company fell on their faces. Perhaps some had been ordered
to do this and so set the fashion, or perhaps the multitude were
really overcome by the splendour of the pageant and the sight of Cyrus
himself, stately and tall and fair. [15] For hitherto none of the
Persians had done obeisance to Cyrus.

And now, as the chariot moved onwards, the four thousand lancers went
before it, two thousand on either side, and close behind came the
mace-bearers, mounted on horseback, with javelins in their hands,
three hundred strong. [16] Then the royal steeds were led past, with
golden bridles and striped housings, two hundred and more, and then
followed two thousand spearmen and after them the squadron of cavalry
first formed, ten thousand men, a hundred deep and a hundred riding
abreast, with Chrysantas at their head. [17] And behind them the
second body of the Persian horse, ten thousand more, in the same
order, under Hystaspas, and then again ten thousand under Datamas, and
others behind them under Gadatas. [18] And after them the Median
cavalry, and then the Armenians, the Hyrcanians, the Cadousians, and
the Sakians in their order; and after the cavalry a squadron of war-
chariots, drawn up four deep, with Artabatas the Persian in command.

[19] All along the route thousands of men followed, outside the
barriers, with petitions to Cyrus. Accordingly he sent his mace-
bearers, who rode beside him for the purpose, three on either side of
his chariot, bidding them tell the crowd of suitors, if they had need
of anything, to acquaint one of the cavalry officers and he would
speak for them. So the petitioners withdrew, and fell to marching
along the lines of the cavalry, considering whom they should address.
[20] Cyrus meanwhile would send messengers to the friends he wished to
be courted, saying to them, "If any man appeals to you and you think
nothing of what he says, pay no heed to him, but if his request seems
just, report it to me, and we will discuss it together and arrange
matters for him." [21] As a rule the officers so summoned did not
loiter, but dashed up at full speed, glad to enhance the authority of
Cyrus and to show their own allegiance. But there was a certain
Dapharnes, a person of somewhat boorish manners, who fancied that he
would make a show of greater independence if he did not hurry himself.
[22] Cyrus noted this, and quietly, before the man could reach him,
sent another messenger to say he had no further need of him; and that
was the last time Dapharnes was ever summoned. [23] And when the next
officer rode up, in front of Dapharnes though sent for after him,
Cyrus presented him with a horse from his train and bade one of the
mace-bearers lead it wherever he wished. The people saw in this a high
mark of honour; and a greater crowd than ever paid their court to the
favoured man.

[24] When the procession reached the sacred precincts, sacrifice was
offered to Zeus, a whole burnt-offering of bulls, and a whole burnt-
offering of horses to the Sun; and then they sacrificed to the Earth,
slaying the victims as the Persian priests prescribed, and then to the
heroes who hold the Syrian land. [25] And when the rites were done,
Cyrus, seeing that the ground was suitable for racing, marked out a
goal, and a course half-a-mile in length, and bade the cavalry and the
chariots match their horses against each other, tribe by tribe. He
himself raced among his Persians, and won with ease, for he was far
the best horseman there. The winner among the Medes was Artabazus, the
horse he rode being a gift from Cyrus. The Syrian race was won by
their chieftain, the Armenian by Tigranes, the Hyrcanian by the
general's son, and the Sakian by a private soldier who left all his
rivals half the course behind him.

[26] Cyrus, so the story says, asked the young man if he would take a
kingdom for his horse.

"No kingdom for me," answered the soldier, "but I would take the
thanks of a gallant fellow."

[27] "Well," said Cyrus, "I would like to show you where you could
hardly fail to hit one, even if you shut your eyes."

"Be so good as to show me now," said the Sakian, "and I will take aim
with this clod," picking up one from the ground.

[28] Then Cyrus pointed to a group of his best friends, and the other
shut his eyes and flung the clod, and it struck Pheraulas as he
galloped by, bearing some message from Cyrus. But he never so much as
turned, flashing past on his errand. [29] Then the Sakian opened his
eyes and asked whom he had hit?

"Nobody, I assure you," said Cyrus, "who is here."

"And nobody who is not, of course," said the young man.

"Oh yes, you did," answered Cyrus, "you hit that officer over there
who is riding so swiftly paste the chariot-lines."

[30] "And how is it," asked the other, "that he does not even turn his
head?"

"Half-witted, probably," said Cyrus.

Whereat the young man rode off to see who it was, and found Pheraulas,
with his chin and beard all begrimed and bloody, gore trickling from
his nostrils were the clod had struck him. [31] The Sakian cried out
to know if he was hit.

"As you see," answered Pheraulas.

"Then," said the other, "let me give you my horse."

"But why?" asked Pheraulas.

And so the Sakian had to tell him all about the matter, adding, "And
after all, you see, I did not miss a gallant fellow."

[32] "Ah," said Pheraulas, "if you had been wise, you would have
chosen a richer one; but I take your gift with all my thanks. And I
pray the gods," he added, "who let me be your target, to help me now
and see that you may never regret your gift. For the present, mount my
horse yourself and ride back; I will be with you shortly."

So they exchanged steeds and parted.

The winner of the Cadousian race was Rathines.

[33] Then followed chariot-races, tribe by tribe as before: and to all
the winners Cyrus gave goblets of price, and oxen, that they might
have the wherewithal for sacrifice and feasting. He himself took an ox
for his own meed, but he gave all the goblets to Pheraulas to show his
approval of the arrangements for the march. [34] And the manner of
that procession, then first established by Cyrus, continues to this
day, the same in all things, save that the victims are absent when
there is no sacrifice. And when it was over, the soldiers went back to
the city, and took up their quarters for the night, some in houses and
some with their regiments.

[35] Now Pheraulas had invited the Sakian who had given him the horse,
and he entertained him with the best he had, and set before him a full
board, and after they had dined he filled the goblets Cyrus had given
him, and drank to his guest, and offered them all to him. [36] And the
Sakian looked round on the rich and costly rugs, and the beautiful
furniture, and the train of servants, and cried:

"Tell me, Pheraulas, do you belong to wealthy folk at home?"

[37] "Wealthy folk indeed!" cried Pheraulas, "men who live by their
hands, you mean. My father, I can tell you, had work enough to rear me
and get me a boy's schooling; he had to toil hard and live sparely,
and when I grew to be a lad he could not afford to keep me idle, he
took me to a farm in the country and set me there to work it. [38]
Then it was my turn, and I supported him while he lived, digging with
my own hands and sowing the seed in a ridiculous little plot of
ground, and yet it was not a bad bit of soil either, but as good and
as honest earth as ever you saw: whatever seed it got from me, it paid
me back again, and so prettily and carefully and duly, principal and
interest both; not that the interest was very much, I won't say it
was, though once or twice, out of pure generosity, that land gave me
twice was much as I put into it. That's how I used to live at home, in
the old days: to-day it's different, and all that you see here I owe
to Cyrus."

[39] Then the Sakian cried:

"O lucky fellow! Lucky in everything, and most of all in coming to
wealth from beggary! I know your riches must taste the sweeter,
because you hungered for them first and now are full."

[40] But Pheraulas answered:

"Do you really think, my friend, that my joy in life has grown with
the growth of my wealth? Do you not know," he went on, "that I neither
eat nor drink nor sleep with any more zest than I did when I was poor?
What I get by all these goods is simply this: I have more to watch
over, more to distribute, and more trouble in looking after more. [41]
I have a host of servants now, one set asking me for food, another for
drink, another for clothing, and some must have the doctor, and then a
herdsman comes, carrying the carcase of some poor sheep mangled by the
wolves, or perhaps with an ox that has fallen down a precipice, or
maybe he has to tell me that a murrain has broken out among my flocks.
It seems to me," Pheraulas ended, "that I suffer more to-day through
having much than ever I did before through having nothing."

[42] "But--Heaven help us!" cried the Sakian, "surely, when it is all
safe, to see so much of your own must make you much happier than me?"

"I assure you, my friend," said Pheraulas, "the possession of riches
is nothing like so sweet as the loss of them is painful. And here is a
proof for you: no rich man lies awake from pure joy at his wealth, but
did you ever know a man who could close his eyes when he was losing?"

[43] "No," said the Sakian, "nor yet one who could drop asleep when he
was winning."

[44] "True enough," answered the other, "and if having were as sweet
as getting, the rich would be a thousand times more happy than the
poor. And remember, stranger," he added, "a man who has much must
spend much on the gods and his friends and his guests, and if he takes
intense delight in his riches, spending will cause him intense
annoyance."

[45] "Upon my word," said the Sakian, "for myself, I am not that sort
of man at all: to have much and to spend much is just my idea of
perfect happiness."

[46] "Heavens!" cried Pheraulas, "what a chance for us both! You can
win perfect happiness now, this instant, and make me happy too! Here,
take all these things for your own, make what use of them you please;
and as for me, you can keep me as your guest, only much more cheaply
if you like: it will be quite enough for me to share whatever you have
yourself."

"You are jesting," said the Sakian.

[47] But Pheraulas swore with all solemnity that he spoke in earnest.

"Yes, my friend," he added, "and there are other matters that I can
arrange for you with Cyrus: freedom from military service or
attendance at the gates. All you will have to do will be to stay at
home and grow rich: I will do the rest on your behalf and mine. And if
I win any treasure through my service at court or on the field, I will
bring it home to you, and you will be lord of more; only," he added,
"you must free me from the responsibility of looking after it, for if
you give me leisure from these cares I believe you will be of great
use to Cyrus and myself."

[48] So the talk ended and they struck a bargain on these terms, and
kept it. And the Sakian thought he had found happiness because he was
the master of much wealth, and the other felt he was in bliss because
he had got a steward who would leave him leisure to do what he liked
best. [49] For the character of Pheraulas was amiable: he was a loving
comrade, and no service seemed so sweet to him or so helpful as the
service of man. Man, he believed, was the noblest of the animals and
the most grateful: praise, Pheraulas saw, will reap counter-praise,
kindness will stir kindness in return, and goodwill goodwill; those
whom men know to love them they cannot hate, and, in a way no other
animals will, they cherish their parents in life and in death and
requite their care. All other creatures, in short, compared with man,
are lacking in gratitude and heart.

[50] Thus Pheraulas was overjoyed to feel that he could now be quit of
anxiety for his wealth, and devote himself to his friends, while the
Sakian was delighted with all that he had and all that he could use.
The Sakian loved Pheraulas because he was for ever adding something to
the store, and Pheraulas loved the Sakian because he was willing to
assume the entire burden, and however much the cares increased he
never broke into the other's leisure. Thus those two lived their
lives.

[C.4] Now Cyrus offered sacrifice and held high festival for his
victories, and he summoned to the feast those of his friends who bore
him most affection and had shown most desire to exalt him. With them
were bidden Artabazus the Mede, and Tigranes the Armenian, and the
commander of the Hyrcanian cavalry, and Gobryas. [2] Gadatas was the
chief of the mace-bearers, and the whole household was arranged as he
advised. When there were guests at dinner, Gadatas would not sit down,
but saw to everything, and when they were alone he sat at meat with
Cyrus, who took delight in his company, and in return for all his
services he was greatly honoured by Cyrus and that led to more honours
for others. [3] As the guests entered, Gadatas would show each man to
his seat, and the places were chosen with care: the friend whom Cyrus
honoured most was placed on his left hand (for that was the side most
open to attack), the second on his right, the third next to the left-
hand guest, and the fourth next to the right, and so on, whatever the
number of guests might be. [4] Cyrus thought it well it should be
known how much each man was honoured, for he saw that where the world
believes merit will win no crown and receive no proclamation, there
the spirit of emulation dies, but if all see that the best man gains
most, then the rivalry grows keen. [5] Thus it was that Cyrus marked
out the men he favoured by the seat of honour and the order of
precedence. Nor did he assign the honourable place to one friend for
all time; he made it a law that by good deeds a man might rise into a
higher seat or through sloth descend into a lower; and he would have
felt ashamed if it were not known that the guest most honoured at his
table received most favours at his hands. These customs that arose in
the reign of Cyrus continue to our time, as we can testify.

[6] While they were at the feast that day it struck Gobryas that
though there was nothing surprising in the abundance and variety at
the table of one who was lord over so vast an empire, yet it was
strange that Cyrus, who had done such mighty deeds, should never keep
any dainty for himself, but must always be at pains to share it with
the company. More than once also he saw Cyrus send off to an absent
friend some dish that had chanced to please him. [7] So that by the
time they had finished their meal all the viands had been given away
by Cyrus, and the board was bare.

Then Gobryas said, "Truly, Cyrus, until to-day I used to think it was
in generalship that you outshone other men the most, but, by heaven! I
say now it is not in generalship at all, it is generosity."

[8] "Maybe," said Cyrus, "at least I take far more pride in this work
than in the other."

"How can that be?" asked Gobryas.

"Because," said he, "the one does good to man and the other injury."

[9] Presently as the wine went round and round, Hystaspas turned to
Cyrus and said:

"Would you be angry, Cyrus, if I asked something I long to know?"

"On the contrary," answered Cyrus, "I should be vexed if I saw you
silent when you longed to ask."

"Tell me then," said the other, "have you ever called me and found I
refused to come?"

"What a question!" said Cyrus, "of course not."

"Well, have I ever been slow in coming?"

"No, never."

"Or failed to do anything you ordered?"

"No," said Cyrus, "I have no fault to find at all."

"Whatever I had to do, I always did it eagerly and with all my heart,
did I not?"

"Most assuredly," answered Cyrus.

[10] "Then why, Cyrus, why, in heaven's name, have you singled out
Chrysantas for a more honourable seat than me?"

"Shall I really tell you?" asked Cyrus in his turn.

"By all means," said the other.

"And you will not be annoyed if I tell you the plain truth?"

[11] "On the contrary, it will comfort me to know I have not been
wronged."

"Well, then, Chrysantas never waited to be called; he came of his own
accord on our behalf, and he made it his business to do, not merely
what he was ordered, but whatever he thought would help us. When
something had to be said to the allies, he would not only suggest what
was fitting for me to say myself, he would guess what I wanted the
allies to know but could not bring myself to utter, since it was about
myself, and he would say it for me as though it were his own opinion;
in fact, for everything of the kind he was nothing less to me than a
second and a better self. And now he is always insisting that what he
has already got is quite enough for himself, and always trying to
discover something more for me: he takes a greater pride and joy in
all my triumphs than I do myself."

[12] "By Hera," said Hystaspas, "I am right glad I asked you. Only one
thing puzzles me: how am I to show my joy at your success? Shall I
clap my hands and laugh, or what shall I do?"

"Dance the Persian dance, of course," said Artabazus. And all the
company laughed.

[13] And as the drinking deepened Cyrus put a question to Gobryas.

"Tell me, Gobryas, would you be better pleased to give your daughter
to one of our company to-day than the day when you met us first?"

"Well," said Gobryas, "am I also to tell the truth?"

"Certainly," said Cyrus, "no question looks for a lie."

"Then," said Gobryas, "I assure you, I would far rather give her in
marriage to-day."

"Can you tell us why?" said Cyrus.

"That I can," said he.

[14] "Say on, then."

"At that time, I saw, it is true, the gallant manner in which your men
endured toil and danger, but to-day I see the modesty with which they
bear success. And I believe, Cyrus, that the man who takes good-
fortune well is further to seek than he who can endure adversity; for
success engenders insolence in many hearts, while suffering teaches
sobriety and fortitude."

[15] And Cyrus said, "Hystaspas, did you hear the saying of Gobryas?"

"I did indeed," he answered, "and if he has many more as good, he will
find me a suitor for his daughter, a far more eager one than if he had
shown me all his goblets."

[16] "Well," said Gobryas, "I have many such written down at home, and
you may have them all if you take my daughter to wife. And as for
goblets," he added, "since it seems you cannot away with them, perhaps
I might give them to Chrysantas to punish him for having filled your
seat."

[17] "Listen to me," said Cyrus, "Hystaspas, and all of you. If you
will but tell me, any of you, when you propose to marry, you would
soon discover what a clever advocate you had in me."

[18] But Gobryas interposed, "And if one of us wants to give his
daughter in marriage, to whom should he apply?"

"To me also," answered Cyrus; "I assure you, I am adept in the art."

"What art is that?" Chrysantas inquired.

[19] "The art of discerning the wife to suit each man."

"Then by all the gods," said Chrysantas, "tell me what sort of wife
would do for me?"

[20] "In the first place," he answered, "she must be short, for you
are not tall yourself, and if you married a tall maiden and wanted to
give her a kiss when she stood up straight, you would have to jump to
reach her like a little dog."

"Your advice is straight enough," said Chrysantas; "and I am but a
sorry jumper at the best."

[21] "In the next place," Cyrus went on, "a flat nose would suit you
very well."

"A flat nose?" said the other, "why?"

"Because your own is high enough, and flatness, you may be sure, will
go best with height."

"You might as well say," retorted Chrysantas, "that one who has dined
well, like myself, is best matched with the dinnerless."

"Quite so," answered Cyrus, "a full stomach is high and an empty
paunch is flat."

[22] "And now," said Chrysantas, "in heaven's name, tell us the bride
for a flat king?"

But at this Cyrus laughed outright, and all the others with him. [23]
And the laughter still rang loud when Hystaspas said:

"There is one thing, Cyrus, that I envy in your royal state more than
all the rest."

"And what is that?" said Cyrus.

"That though you are flat, you can raise a laugh."

"Ah," said Cyrus, "what would you give to have as much said of you? To
have it reported on all sides and wherever you wished to stand well
that you were a man of wit?"

Thus they bantered each other and gave jest for jest.

[24] Then Cyrus brought out a woman's attire and ornaments of price
and gave them to Tigranes as a present for his wife, because she had
followed her husband so manfully to the war, and he gave a golden
goblet to Artabazus, and a horse to the Hyrcanian leader, and many
another splendid gift among the company.

"And to you, Gobryas," said he, "I will give a husband for your
daughter."

[25] "Let me be the gift," said Hystaspas, "and then I shall get those
writings."

"But have you a fortune on your side," asked Cyrus, "to match the
bride's?"

"Certainly, I have," he answered, "I may say twenty times as great."

"And where," asked Cyrus, "may those treasures be?"

"At the foot of your throne," he answered, "my gracious lord."

"I ask no more," said Gobryas, and held out his right hand. "Give him
to me, Cyrus," he said; "I accept him."

[26] At that Cyrus took the right hand of Hystaspas and laid it in the
hand of Gobryas, and the pledge was given and received. Then Cyrus
gave beautiful gifts to Hystaspas for his bride, but he drew
Chrysantas to his breast and kissed him. [27] Thereupon Artabazus
cried:

"Heaven help us, Cyrus! The goblet you gave me is not of the fine gold
you have given Chrysantas now!"

"Well," said Cyrus, "you shall have the same one day."

"When?" asked the other.

"Thirty years hence," said Cyrus.

"I will wait," said Artabazus: "I will not die: be ready for me."

And then the banquet came to an end: the guests rose, and Cyrus stood
up with them and conducted them to the door.

[28] But on the morrow he arranged that all the allies and all who had
volunteered should be sent back to their homes, all except those who
wished to take up their abode with him. To these he gave grants of
land and houses, still held by their descendants, Medes for the
greater part, and Hyrcanians. And to those who went home he gave many
gifts and sent them away well content, both officers and men. [29]
After this he distributed among his own soldiers all the wealth he had
taken at Sardis, choice gifts for the captains of ten thousand and for
his own staff in proportion to their deserts, and the rest in equal
shares, delivering to every captain one share with orders to divide it
among their subordinates as he had divided the whole among them. [30]
Thereupon each officer gave to the officers directly under him,
judging the worth of each, until it came to the captains of six, who
considered the cases of the privates in their own squads, and gave
each man what he deserved: and thus every soldier in the army received
an equitable share. [31] But after the distribution of it all there
were some who said:

"How rich Cyrus must be, to have given us all so much!"

"Rich?" cried others, "what do you mean? Cyrus is no money-maker: he
is more glad to give than to get."

[32] When Cyrus heard of this talk and the opinions held about him, he
gathered together his friends and the chief men of the state and spoke
as follows:

"Gentlemen and friends of mine, I have known men who were anxious to
have it thought they possessed more than they really had, thinking
this would give them an air of freedom and nobility. But in my opinion
the result was the very opposite of what they wished. If it is thought
that a man has great riches and does not help his friends in
proportion to his wealth, he cannot but appear ignoble and niggardly.
[33] There are others," he went on, "who would have their wealth
forgotten, and these I look upon as traitors to their friends: for it
must often happen that a comrade is in need and yet hesitates to tell
them because he does not know how much they have, and so he is kept in
the dark and left to starve. [34] The straightforward course, it seems
to me, is always to make no secret of our own resources, but to use
them all, whatever they are, in our efforts to win the crown of
honour. Accordingly I am anxious to show you all my possessions so far
as they can be seen, and to give you a list of the rest."

[35] With these words he proceeded to point out his visible treasures,
and he gave an exact account of those that could not be shown. He
ended by saying:

[36] "All these things, gentlemen, you must consider yours as much as
mine. I have collected them, not that I might spend them on myself or
waste them in my own use: I could not do that if I tried. I keep them
to reward him who does a noble deed, and to help any of you who may be
in want of anything, so that you may come to me and take what ou
require."

Such were the words of Cyrus.

[C.5] But now that all was well in Babylon and Cyrus felt he might
leave the land, he began to prepare for a march to Persia, and sent
out orders to his men. And when he had all he needed, the steeds were
yoked, and he set off. [2] And here we will explain how it was that so
vast a host could unpack and pack again without a break of order, and
take up a position with such speed wherever it was desired. When the
king is on the march his attendants, of course, are provided with
tents and encamp with him, winter and summer alike. [3] From the first
the Cyrus made it a custom to have his tent pitched facing east, and
later on he fixed the space to be left between himself and his
lancers, and then he stationed his bakers on the right and his cooks
on the left, the cavalry on the right again, and the baggage-train on
the left. Everything else was so arranged that each man knew his own
quarters, their position and their size. [4] When the army was packing
up after a halt, each man put together the baggage he used himself,
and others placed it on the animals: so that at one and the same
moment all his bearers came to the baggage-train and each man laid his
load on his own beasts. Thus all the tents could be struck in the same
time as one. [5] And it was the same when the baggage had to be
unpacked. Again, in order that the necessaries should be prepared in
time, each man was told beforehand what he had to do: and thus all the
divisions could be provided for as speedily as one. [6] And, just as
the serving-men had their appointed places, so the different regiments
had their own stations, adapted to their special style of fighting,
and each detachment knew their quarters and went to them without
hesitation. [7] Even in a private house, orderliness, Cyrus knew, was
a most excellent thing: every one, if he needed anything, would then
know where to get it; but he held it still more desirable for the
arrangement of an army, seeing that the moment for action passes far
more quickly in war and the evil from being too late is far more
grave. Therefore he gave more thought and care to order and
arrangement than to anything else.

[8] His own position, to begin with, must be at the centre of the
camp, as this was the safest place, and next to him must come his most
faithful followers, as their habit was. Beyond these, in a ring, lay
the cavalry and the charioteers. [9] For Cyrus held to it that these
troops also needed a safe position: their equipment could not be kept
at hand for them, and if they were to be of any use at all they needed
considerable time for arming. [10] The targeteers were placed to left
and right of the cavalry, and the bowmen in front and rear. [11]
Finally, the heavy-armed troops and those who carried the huge shields
surrounded the whole encampment like a wall; so that in case of need,
if the cavalry had to mount, the steadiest troops would stand firm in
front and let them arm in safety. [12] He insisted that the targeteers
and archers should, like the soldiers of the line, sleep at their
posts, in case of alarm at night, and be ready at any moment, while
the infantry dealt with the assailant at close quarters, to hurl darts
and javelins at them over the others' heads. [13] Moreover, all the
generals had standards on their tents; and just as an intelligent
serving-man in a city will know most of the houses, at any rate of the
most important people, so the squires of Cyrus knew the ways of the
camp and the quarters of the generals and the standards of each. Thus,
if Cyrus needed any one they had not to search and seek, but could run
by the shortest road and summon him at once. [14] Owing to this clear
arrangement, it was easy to see where good discipline was kept and
where duty was neglected. With these dispositions Cyrus felt that if
an attack should be made, by night or day, the enemy would find not so
much a camp as an ambuscade. [15] Nor was it enough, he considered,
for a real master of tactics to know how to extend his front without
confusion, or deepen his ranks, or get from column into line, or wheel
round quickly when the enemy appeared on the right or the left or in
the rear: the true tactician must also be able to break up his troops
into small bodies, whenever necessary, and place each division exactly
where it would be of the greatest use; he must know how to quicken
speed when it was essential to forestall the enemy; these and a
hundred other operations are part of his science, and Cyrus studied
them all with equal care. [16] On the march he varied the order
constantly to suit the needs of the moment, but for the camp, as a
rule, he adopted the plan we have described.

[17] And now when the march had brought them into Media, Cyrus turned
aside to visit Cyaxares. After they had met and embraced, Cyrus began
by telling Cyaxares that a palace in Babylon, and an estate, had been
set aside for him so that he might have a residence of his own
whenever he came there, and he offered him other gifts, most rich and
beautiful. [18] And Cyaxares was glad to take them from his nephew,
and then he sent for his daughter, and she came, carrying a golden
crown, and bracelets, and a necklace of wrought gold, and a most
beautiful Median robe, as splendid as could be. [19] The maiden placed
the crown upon the head of Cyrus, and as she did so Cyaxares said:

"I will give her to you, Cyrus, my own daughter, to be your wife. Your
father wedded the daughter of my father, and you are their son; and
this is the little maid whom you carried in your arms when you were
with us as a lad, and whenever she was asked whom she meant to marry,
she would always answer 'Cyrus.' And for her dowry I will give her the
whole of Media: since I have no lawful son."

[20] So he spoke, and Cyrus answered:

"Cyaxares, I can but thank you myself for all you offer me, the
kinship and the maiden and the gifts, but I must lay the matter before
my father and my mother before I accept, and then we will thank you
together."

That was what Cyrus said, but none the less he gave the maiden the
gifts he thought would please her father. And when he had done so, he
marched on home to Persia.

[21] And when he reached the borders of his fatherland, he left the
mass of his troops on the frontier, and went forward alone with his
friends to the city, leading victims enough for all the Persians to
sacrifice and hold high festival. And he brought special gifts for his
father and his mother and his friends of old, and for the high
officers of state, the elders, and all the Persian Peers; and he gave
every Persian man and every Persian woman such bounties as the king
confers to-day whenever he visits Persia. [22] After this Cambyses
gathered together the elders of the land and the chief officers, who
have authority in the highest matters, and spoke as follows:

"Men of Persia, and Cyrus, my son, both of you are dear to me and must
needs be dear; I am the king of my people and the father of my son;
therefore I am bound to lay before you openly all that I believe to be
for the good of both. [23] In the past the nation has done great
things for Cyrus by giving him an army and appointing him the leader,
and Cyrus, God helping him, has made my Persians famous in all the
world by his leadership, and crowned you with glory in Asia. Of those
who served with him he has made the bravest wealthy for life, and
given sustenance and full pay to numbers. By founding the cavalry he
has won the plains for Persia. [24] If your hearts are still the same
in future, all of you will bless each other: but if you, my son, would
be puffed up by your present fortune and attempt to rule the Persians
for your own advantage as you rule the rest of the world, or if you,
my people, should envy this man's power and try to drive him from his
throne, I tell you, you will cut each other off from many precious
things. [25] Therefore, that this should never be, and only good be
yours, I counsel you to offer sacrifice together, and call the gods to
witness and make a covenant. You, Cyrus, shall vow to resist with all
your strength any man who attacks our land of Persia or tries to
overthrow our laws; and you, my people, must promise that if rebels
attempt to depose Cyrus or if his subjects revolt, you will render aid
to him and to yourselves in whatever way he wishes. [26] Now, so long
as I live, the kingdom of Persia is and continues mine, but when I die
it passes to Cyrus if he is still alive, and whenever he visits Persia
it should be a holy custom for him to offer sacrifice on your behalf,
even as I do now; and when he is abroad, it will be well for you, I
think, if the member of our family whom you count the noblest fulfils
the sacred rites."

[27] Cambyses ended, and Cyrus and the officers of Persia agreed to
all he said. They made the covenant and called the gods to witness,
and to this day they keep it still, the Persians and the Great King.
And when it was done, Cyrus took his leave and came back to Media.
[28] There, with the full consent of his father and his mother, he
wedded the daughter of Cyaxares, the fame of whose beauty has lasted
to this day. And after the marriage his steeds were yoked and they set
out for Babylon.

[C.6] When he was in Babylon once more, he thought it would be well to
appoint satraps and set them over the conquered tribes. Yet he did not
wish the commandants in the citadels and the captains in charge of the
garrisons throughout the country to be under any authority but his
own. Herein he showed his foresight, realising that if any satrap
became insolent and rebellious, relying on his own wealth and the
numbers at his back, he would at once find a power to oppose him
within his own district. [2] In order to carry out this plan, Cyrus
resolved to summon a council of the leading men and explain the terms
on which the satraps who went would go. In this way, he thought, they
would not feel aggrieved, whereas, if a man found himself appointed
and then learnt the restrictions for the first time, he might well
take it ill, fancying it a sign of personal mistrust. [3] So it was
that Cyrus called a council and spoke as follows:

"Gentlemen and friends of mine, you are aware that we have garrisons
and commandants in the cities we conquered, stationed there at the
time. I left them with orders simply to guard the fortifications and
not meddle with anything else. Now I do not wish to remove them from
their commands, for they have done their duty nobly, but I propose to
send others, satraps, who will govern the inhabitants, receive the
tribute, give the garrisons their pay, and discharge all necessary
dues. [4] Further, I think it right that certain of you who live here
and yet on whom I may lay the task of travelling to these nations and
working for me among them, should possess houses there and estates,
where tribute may be brought them, and where they may find a place of
their own to lodge in."

[5] With these words he assigned houses and districts to many of his
friends among the lands he had subdued: and to this day their
descendants possess the estates, although they reside at court
themselves. [6] "Now," he added, "we must choose for the satraps who
are to go abroad persons who will not forget to send us anything of
value in their districts, so that we who are at home may share in all
the wealth of the world. For if any danger comes, it is we who must
ward it off."

[7] With that he ended for the time, but later on when he came to know
what friends of his were ready and willing to go on the terms
prescribed, he selected those he thought best qualified for the work,
and sent Magabazus to Arabia, Artabatas to Cappadocia, Artacamas to
Greater Phrygia, Chrysantas to Lydia and Susia, Adousius, whom the
Carians had asked for themselves, to Caria, and Pharnouchus to Aeolia
and Phrygia by the Hellespont.

[8] But to Cilicia, Cyprus, and Paphlagonia, Cyrus sent no satraps,
because they had shown their willingness to march against Babylon;
tribute, however, was imposed on them as on the others. [9] In
accordance with the rules then laid down by Cyrus, the citadel
garrisons and the captains-of-the-guard are to this day appointed
directly by the king, and have their names on the royal list. [10] All
satraps whom Cyprus sent out were ordered to do as they saw him doing:
each was to raise a body of cavalry and a chariot-force from the
Persians and the allies who went out with him; and all who received
grants of land and official residences were to present themselves at
the palace-gates, study temperance and self-control, and hold
themselves in readiness for the service of their satrap. Their boys
were to be educated at the gates, as with Cyrus, and the satrap was to
lead his nobles out to hunt, and train himself and his followers in
the art of war. [11] "Whichever of you," Cyrus added, "can show the
greatest number of chariots in proportion to his power, and the
largest and finest body of cavalry, I will honour him as my best ally
and most faithful fellow-guardian of the Persian empire. Let the best
men always have the preference at your courts as they have at mine,
give them seats of honour as I do, and let your table be spread, as
mine is, not only for your own household, but for your friends also,
and for the honour of him who may accomplish any noble deed. [12] You
must lay out parks and breed game, and never touch food until you have
toiled for it, nor give your horses fodder until they have been
exercised. I am but a single man, with only human strength and human
virtue, and I could not by myself preserve the good things that are
yours: I must have good comrades to help me in goodness, and only thus
can I be your defender; and you likewise, if you are to help me, must
be good yourselves and have good men at your side. [13] Remember that
I have not spoken unto you as unto slaves: what I say you ought to do
I strive to do myself. And even as I bid you follow me, so I would
have you teach those in authority under you to follow you."

[14] Such were the principles then laid down by Cyrus, and to this day
all the royal garrisons are appointed in the same manner, the gates of
all the governors are thronged in the same way, the houses, great and
small, are managed in the same fashion, everywhere the most
distinguished guests are given seats of honour, every province is
visited on the same system, and everywhere the threads of numberless
affairs are gathered into the hands of a few superiors. [15] Having
given these instructions, Cyrus assigned a body of troops to each of
his satraps, and sent them out to their provinces, bidding them to be
ready for a campaign in the new year and for a review of their
soldiers, their weapons, their horses, and their chariots. [16] And
here I may notice another custom, also instituted by Cyrus, it is
said, and still in force to-day: every year a progress of inspection
is made by an officer at the head of an army, to help any satrap who
may require aid, or bring the insolent to their senses; and, if there
has been negligence in the delivery of tribute, or the protection of
the inhabitants, or the cultivation of the soil, or indeed any
omission of duty whatsoever, the officer is there to put the matter
right, or if he cannot do so himself, to report it to the king, who
decides what is to be done about the offender. The announcements so
often made, such as "the king's son is coming down," or "the king's
brother," or "the king's eye," refer to these inspectors, but
sometimes no one appears, for at any moment the officer may be turned
back at the king's command. [17] We hear of another arrangement,
devised to meet the huge size of the empire and enable the king to
learn with great celerity the state of affairs at any distance. Cyrus
first ascertained how far a horse could travel in one day without
being over-ridden, and then he had a series of posting-stations built,
one day's ride apart, with relays of horses, and grooms to take care
of them, and a proper man in charge of each station to receive the
despatches and hand them on, take over the jaded horses and men, and
furnish fresh ones. [18] Sometimes, we are told, this post does not
even halt at night: the night-messenger relieves the day-messenger and
rides on. Some say that, when this is done, the post travels more
quickly than the crane can fly, and, whether that is true or not,
there is no doubt it is the quickest way in which a human being can
travel on land. To learn of events so rapidly and be able to deal with
them at once is of course a great advantage.

[19] After a year had passed, Cyrus collected all his troops at
Babylon, amounting, it is said, to one hundred and twenty thousand
horse, two thousand scythe-bearing chariots, and six hundred thousand
foot. [20] Then, seeing that all was got together, he set out for that
campaign of his, on which, the story says, he subdued the nations from
the borders of Syria as far as the Red Sea. After that there followed,
we are told, the expedition against Egypt and its conquest. [21] From
that time forward his empire was bounded on the east by the Red Sea,
on the north by the Euxine, on the west by Cyprus and Egypt, and
towards the south by Ethiopia. Of these outlying districts, some were
scarcely habitable, owing to heat or cold, drought or excessive rain.
[22] But Cyrus himself always lived at the centre of his dominions,
seven months in Babylon during the winter season, where the land is
warm and sunny, three months at Susa in the spring, and during the
height of summer in Ecbatana, so that for him it was springtime all
the year. [23] Towards him the disposition of all men was such that
every nation felt they had failed unless they could send Cyrus the
treasures of their land, plants, or animals, or works of art. And
every city felt the same, and every private person counted himself on
the road to riches if he could do Cyrus some special service, for
Cyrus took only such things as they had in abundance, and gave them in
return what he saw they lacked.

[C.7] Thus the years passed on, and Cyrus was now in a ripe old age,
and he journeyed to Persia for the seventh time in his reign. His
father and mother were long since dead in the course of nature, and
Cyrus offered sacrifice according to the law, and led the sacred dance
of his Persians after the manner of his forefathers, and gave gifts to
every man according to his wont.

[2] But one night, as he lay asleep in the royal palace, he dreamt a
dream. It seemed to him that some one met him, greater than a man, and
said to him, "Set your house in order, Cyrus: the time has come, and
you are going to the gods."

With that Cyrus awoke out of sleep, and he all but seemed to know that
the end of his life was at hand. [3] Straightway he took victims and
offered sacrifice to Zeus, the god of his fathers, and to the Sun, and
all the other gods, on the high places where the Persians sacrifice,
and then he made this prayer:

"Zeus, god of my fathers, and thou, O Sun, and all ye gods, accept
this sacrifice, my offering for many a noble enterprise, and suffer me
to thank you for the grace ye have shown me, telling me all my life,
by victims and by signs from heaven, by birds and by the voices of
men, what things I ought to do and what I ought to refrain from doing.
Deep is my thankfulness that I was able to recognise your care, and
never lifted up my heart too high even in my prosperity. I beseech you
now to bless my children also, and my wife, and my friends, and my
fatherland; and for myself, may my death be as my life has been."

[4] Then Cyrus went home again and lay down on his bed, for he longed
to rest. And when the hour was come, his attendants came to him and
bade him take his bath. But he said he would rather rest. And others
came afterwards, at the usual time, to set the meal before him; but he
could not bring himself to take food: he seemed only to thirst, and
drank readily. [5] It was the same the second day, and the third, and
then he called his sons to his side--it chanced they had followed him
to Persia--and he summoned his friends also and the chief magistrates
of the land, and when they were all met, he began:

[6] "My sons, and friends of mine, the end of my life is at hand: I
know it by many signs. And when I am dead, you must show by word and
deed that you think of me as happy. When I was a child, I had all the
joys and triumphs of a child, and I reaped the treasures of youth as I
grew up, and all the glories of a man when I came to man'e estate. And
as the years passed, I seemed to find my powers grow with them, so
that I never felt my old age weaker than my youth, nor can I think of
anything I attempted or desired wherein I failed. [7] Moreover, I have
seen my friends made happy by my means, and my enemies crushed beneath
my hand. This my fatherland, which was once of no account in Asia, I
leave at the height of power, and of all that I won I think I have
lost nothing. Throughout my whole life I have fared as I prayed to
fare, and the dread that was ever with me lest in days to come I might
see or hear or suffer evil, this dread would never let me think too
highly of myself, or rejoice as a fool rejoices. [8] And if I die now,
I leave my sons behind me, the sons the gods have given me; and I
leave my fatherland in happiness, and my friends. Surely I may hope
that men will count me blessed and cherish my memory. [9] And now I
must leave instructions about my kingdom, that there may be no dispute
among you after my death. Sons of mine, I love you both alike, but I
choose the elder-born, the one whose experience of life is the
greater, to be the leader in council and the guide in action. [10]
Thus was I trained myself, in the fatherland that is yours and mine,
to yield to my elders, my brothers or my fellow-citizens, in the
street, or in the place of meeting, or in the assembly for debate. And
thus have I trained both of you, to honour your elders and be honoured
by those who are younger than yourselves. These are the principles
that I leave with you, sanctioned by time, ingrained in our customs,
embodied in our laws. [11] The sovereignty is yours, Cambyses; the
gods have given it to you, and I also, as far as in me lies; and to
you, Tanaoxares, I give the satrapy over the Medes and the Armenians
and the Cadousians, these three; and though I leave your elder brother
a larger empire and the name of king, your inheritance will bring you,
I believe, more perfect happiness than his. [12] I ask myself what
human joy will be lacking to you: all things which gladden the hearts
of men will be yours--but the craving for what is out of reach, the
load of cares, the restless passion to rival my achievements, the
plots and counterplots, they will follow him who wears the crown, and
they are things, be well assured, that leave little leisure for
happiness. [13] And you, Cambyses, you know of yourself, without words
from me, that your kingdom is not guarded by this golden sceptre, but
by faithful friends; their loyalty is your true staff, a sceptre which
shall not fail. But never think that loyal hearts grow up by nature as
the grass grows in the field: if that were so, the same men would be
loyal to all alike, even as all natural objects are the same to all
mankind. No, every leader must win his own followers for himself, and
the way to win them is not by violence but by loving-kindness. [14]
And if you would seek for friends to stand by you and guard your
throne, who so fit to be the first of them as he who is sprung from
the self-same loins? Our fellow-citizens are nearer to us than
foreigners, and our mess-mates dearer than strangers, and what of
those who are sprung from the same seed, suckled at the same breast,
reared in the same home, loved by the same parents, the same mother,
the same father? [15] What the gods have given to be the seal of
brotherhood do not make of none effect yourselves. But build upon it:
make it the foundation for other loving deeds, and thus the love
between you shall never be overcome. The man who takes thought for his
brother cares for his own self. For who but a brother can win glory
from a brother's greatness? Who can be honoured as a brother can
through a brother's power? Or who so safe from injury as the brother
of the great? [16] Let no one, Tanaoxares, be more eager than yourself
to obey your brother and support him: to no one can his triumph or his
danger come so near. Ask yourself from whom you could win a richer
reward for any kindness. Who could give you stouter help in return for
your own support? And where is coldness so ugly as between brothers?
Or where is reverence so beautiful? And remember, Cambyses, only the
brother who holds pre-eminence in a brother's heart can be safe from
the jealousy of the world. [17] I implore you both, my sons, by the
gods of our fathers, hold each other in honour, if you care at all to
do me pleasure: and none of you can say you know that I shall cease to
be when I cease to live this life of ours. With your bodily eyes you
have never seen my soul, and yet you have discerned its presence
through its working. [18] And have you never marked the terrors which
the spirits of those who have suffered wrong can send into the hearts
of their murderers, and the avenging furies they let loose upon the
wicked? Think you the honours of the dead would still abide, if the
souls of the departed were altogether powerless? [19] Never yet, my
sons, could I be persuaded that the soul only lives so long as she
dwells within this mortal body, and falls dead so soon as she is quit
of that. Nay, I see for myself that it is the soul which lends life to
it, while she inhabits there. [20] I cannot believe that she must lose
all sense on her separation from the senseless body, but rather that
she will reach her highest wisdom when she is set free, pure and
untrammelled at last. And when this body crumbles in dissolution, we
see the several parts thereof return to their kindred elements, but we
do not see the soul, whether she stays or whether she departs. [21]
Consider," he went on, "how these two resemble one another, Death and
his twin-brother Sleep, and it is in sleep that the soul of a man
shows her nature most divine, and is able to catch a glimpse of what
is about to be, for it is then, perhaps, that she is nearest to her
freedom. [22] Therefore, if these things are as I believe, and the
spirit leaves the body behind and is set free, reverence my soul, O
sons of mine, and do as I desire. And even if it be not so, if the
spirit must stay with the body and perish, yet the everlasting gods
abide, who behold all things, with whom is all power, who uphold the
order of this universe, unmarred, unaging, unerring, unfathomable in
beauty and in splendour. Fear them, my sons, and never yield to sin or
wickedness, in thought or word or deed. [23] And after the gods, I
would have you reverence the whole race of man, as it renews itself
for ever; for the gods have not hidden you in the darkness, but your
deeds will be manifest in the eyes of all mankind, and if they be
righteous deeds and pure from iniquity, they will blazon forth your
power: but if you meditate evil against each other, you will forfeit
the confidence of every man. For no man can trust you, even though he
should desire it, if he sees you wrong him whom above all you are
bound to love. [24] Therefore, if my words are strong enough to teach
you your duty to one another, it is well. But, if not, let history
teach you, and there is no better teacher. For the most part, parents
have shown kindness to their children and brothers to their brothers,
but it has been otherwise with some. Look, then, and see which conduct
has brought success, choose to follow that, and your choice will be
wise. [25] And now maybe I have said enough of this. As for my body,
when I am dead, I would not have you lay it up in gold or silver or
any coffin whatsoever, but give it back to the earth with all speed.
What could be more blessed than to lie in the lap of Earth, the mother
of all things beautiful, the nurse of all things good? I have been a
lover of men all my life, and methinks I would fain become a part of
that which does good to man. [26] And now," he added, "now it seems to
me that my life begins to ebb; I feel my spirit slipping away from
those parts she leaves the first. If you would take my hand once more,
or look into my eyes while life is there, draw near me now; but when I
have covered my face, let no man look on me again, not even you, my
sons. [27] But you shall bid the Persians come, and all our allies, to
my sepulchre; and you shall rejoice with me and congratulate me that I
am safe at last, free from suffering or sorrow, whether I am with God
or whether I have ceased to be. Give all who come the entertainment
that is fitting in honour of a man whose life on earth was happy, and
so send them away. [28] Remember my last saying: show kindness to your
friends, and then shall you have it in your power to chastise your
enemies. Good-bye, my dear sons, bid your mother good-bye for me. And
all my friends, who are here or far away, good-bye."

And with these words he gave his hand to them, and then he covered his
face and died.


EPILOGUE

[C.8] Of all the powers in Asia, the kingdom of Cyrus showed itself to
be the greatest and most glorious. On the east it was bounded by the
Red Sea, on the north by the Euxine, on the west by Cyprus and Egypt,
and on the south by Ethiopia. And yet the whole of this enormous
empire was governed by the mind and will of a single man, Cyrus: his
subjects he cared for and cherished as a father might care for his
children, and they who came beneath his rule reverenced him like a
father.

[2] But no sooner was he dead than his sons were at strife, cities and
nations revolted, and all things began to decay. I can show that what
I say is true, and first I will speak of their impiety. In the early
days, I am aware, the king and those beneath him never failed to keep
the oaths they had sworn and fulfil the promises they had given, even
to the worst of criminals. [3] In fact, if such had not been their
character and such their reputation, none of the Hellenic generals who
marched up with the younger Cyrus could have felt the confidence they
did: they would not have trusted a Persian any more than one trusts
them to-day, now that their perfidy is known. As it was, they relied
on their old reputation and put themselves in their power, and many
were taken up to the king and there beheaded. And many of the Asiatics
who served in the same war perished as they did, deluded by one
promise or another.

[4] In other ways also the Persians have degenerated. Noble
achievement in the old days was the avenue to fame: the man was
honoured who risked his life for the king, or brought a city or nation
beneath his sway. But now, if some Mithridates has betrayed his father
Ariobarzanes, or some Reomithres has left his wife and children and
the sons of his friend as hostages at the court of Egypt, and then has
broken the most solemn of all pledges--it is they and their like who
are loaded with the highest honours, if only they are thought to have
gained some advantage for the king. [5] With such examples before
them, all the Asiatics have turned to injustice and impiety. For what
the leaders are, that, as a rule, will the men below them be. Thus has
lawlessness increased and grown among them. [6] And injustice has
grown, and thieving. Not only criminals, but men who are absolutely
innocent are arrested and forced to pay fines for no reason
whatsoever: to be known to have wealth is more dangerous than guilt,
so that the rich do not care to have any dealings with the powerful,
and dare not even risk appearing at the muster of the royal troops.
[7] Therefore, when any man makes war on Persia, whoever he may be, he
can roam up and down the country to his heart's content without
striking a blow, because they have forgotten the gods and are unjust
to their fellow-men. In every way their hearts and minds are lower
than in days gone by.

[8] Nor do they care for their bodies as they did of old. It was
always their custom neither to spit nor blow the nose, only it is
clear this was instituted not from concern for the humours of the
body, but in order to strengthen themselves by toil and sweat. But
nowadays, though this habit is still in vogue, to harden the body by
exercise has quite gone out of fashion. [9] Again, from the first it
was their rule only to take a single meal in the day, which left them
free to give their time to business and exercise. The single meal is
still the rule, but it commences at the earliest hour ever chosen for
breakfast, and the eating and drinking goes on till the last moment
which the latest reveller would choose for bed. [10] It was always
forbidden to bring chamber-pots into the banquet-hall, but the reason
lay in their belief that the right way to keep body and brain from
weakness was to avoid drinking in excess. But to-day, though as in the
old time no such vessels may be carried in, they drink so deep that
they themselves are carried out, too weak to stand on their own legs.
[11] It was a national custom from the first not to eat and drink on
the march nor be seen satisfying the wants of nature, but nowadays,
though they still abstain, they make each march so short that no man
need wonder at their abstinence.

[12] In the old time they went out to hunt so often that the chase
gave enough exercise and training for man and horse alike. But when
the day came that Artaxerxes and all his court were the worse for
wine, the old custom of the king leading the hunt in person began to
pass away. And if any eager spirits hunted with their own followers it
was easy to see the jealousy, and even the hatred, aroused by such
superiority.

[13] It is still the habit to bring up the boys at the palace-gates,
but fine horsemanship has disappeared, for there is no place where the
lads can win applause by their skill. The old belief that the children
of Persia would learn justice by hearing the judges decide the cases
has been turned upside down: the children have only to use their eyes
and they see that the verdict goes to the man with the longest purse.
[14] Children in former times were taught the properties of plants in
order to use the wholesome and avoid the harmful; but now they seem to
learn it for the mere sake of doing harm: at any rate, there is no
country where deaths from poison are so common. [15] And the Persian
to-day is far more luxurious than he was in the time of Cyrus. Then
they still clung to the Persian style of education and the Persian
self-restraint, merely adopting the Median dress and a certain grace
of life. But now the old Persian hardihood may perish for all they
care, if only they preserve the softness of the Mede. [16] I might
give instances of their luxury. They are not content with soft sheets
and rugs for their beds, they must have carpets laid under the bed-
posts to prevent any jarring from the floor. They have given up none
of the cooked dishes invented in former days; on the contrary, they
are always devising new ones, and condiments to boot: in fact, they
keep men for the very purpose. [17] In the winter it is not enough to
have the body covered, and the head and the feet, they must have warm
sleeves as well and gloves for the hands: and in the summer they are
not content with the shade from the trees or the rocks, they must have
servants standing beside them with artificial screens. [18] To have an
endless array of cups and goblets is their special pride: and if these
are come by unjustly, and all the world knows it, why, there is
nothing to blush for in that: injustice has grown too common among
them, and ill-gotten gain. [19] Formerly no Persian was ever to be
seen on foot, but the sole object of the custom was to make them
perfect horsemen. Now they lay more rugs on their horses' backs than
on their own beds; it is not a firm seat they care for, but a soft
saddle.

[20] As soldiers we may imagine how they have sunk below the ancient
standard; in past times it was a national institution that the land-
owner should furnish troopers from his own estate, and men were bound
to go on active service, while the garrison troops in the country
received regular pay; but now the Persian grandees have manufactured a
new type of cavalry, who earn their pay as butlers and cooks and
confectioners and cupbearers and bathmen and flunkeys to serve at
table or remove the dishes, and serving-men to put their lords to bed
and help them to rise, and perfumers to anoint them and rub them and
make them beautiful. [21] In numbers they make a very splendid show,
but they are no use for fighting; as may be seen by what actually
takes place: an enemy can move about their country more freely than
the inhabitants themselves. [22] It will be remembered that Cyrus put
a stop to the old style of fighting at long range, and by arming men
and horses with breastplates and giving each trooper a short spear he
taught them to fight at close quarters. But nowadays they will fight
in neither one style nor the other. [23] The infantry still carry the
large shields, the battle-axes, and the swords, as if they meant to do
battle as they did in Cyrus' day. [24] But they will never close with
the enemy. Nor do they use the scythe-bearing chariots as Cyrus
intended. By the honours he gave he raised the dignity and improved
the quality of his charioteers till he had a body of men who would
charge right into the enemy's ranks; but the generals of to-day,
though they do not even know the charioteers by sight, flatter
themselves that untrained men will serve their purpose quite as well
as trained. [25] So the charioteers will dash off, but before they
reach the enemy half the men have fallen from their boxes, and the
others will jump out of their own accord, and the teams, left without
their drivers, will do more harm to their friends than to their foes.
[26] And since in their hearts the Persians of to-day are well aware
what their fighting condition really is, they always give up the
struggle, and now none of them will take the field at all without
Hellenes to help them, whether they are fighting among themselves or
whether Hellenes are in arms against them: even then it is a settled
thing that they must have the aid of other Hellenes to face them.

[27] I venture to think I have shown the truth of the statement that I
made. I asserted that the Persians of to-day and their allies are less
religious than they were of old, less dutiful to their kindred, less
just and righteous towards other men, and less valiant in war. And if
any man doubts me, let him examine their actions for himself, and he
will find full confirmation of all I say.


NOTES

C1. Xenophon puts into the mouth of Chrysantas his favourite theory of
monarchism, the relationship strongly cemented by obedience and trust
between subjects and king.

C1.4, med. On /willing/ service. This again is one of the best
utterances in all Xenophon. It has a deep spiritual import.

C1.4, fin. He is thinking of Athens, perhaps. It is a choice: obey the
ruler or knock under to foreign foes.

C1.8. Surely a remark of the author. It is an old inveterate thought
of his: "the Master's eye." I feel the /old/ man at times.

C1.9-10. This side of the Persian state-machine strongly impressed the
mind and imagination of Xenophon. Hence he works it into the treatise
on economy as well as here. In fact his expansion of the Socratic
reflections into the /Economist/ has to do, I believe, with these
reflections on state economy.

C1.13. Hellenic aristocratic theory of existence. Leisure for the
grand duties which devolve on the lords of mankind. It doesn't seem to
strike Xenophon that this rigid system of self-absorption in the
higher selfhood of the social system might be destructive of
individual life. Of course he would say, "No, it enlarges the
individual life."

C1.17-20. Seems to me to show Xenophon struggling with the hard parts
of the later Persian system. The theory of Persian feudalism is too
high-strung for these grand satraps, rulers of provinces as big as
ordinary kingdoms. It tends to snap, and from the beginning did. The
archic man has no charm to compel his followers to archic virtue. It
is a negative {episteme} after all. Does Xenophon realise this, or is
hgd. wrong?

C1.21. Cf. headmasters with preposters in a public school, based on
the same system of high aims and duties corresponding to rights.

C1.23, init. Cf. Louis Napoleon in Browning's poem [/Prince
Hohensteil-Schwangau/].

C1.23, med. The Magians, the Persian order of priests. Yet we have
heard of them throughout.

C1.27. A very true saying and very nice the feeling it gives us
towards Xenophon. We think of him with his wife and his little sons
and his friends and their friends.

C1.28. How true of women!

C1.33. A reduplication of the description in Bk. I., and also a
summing-up of Xenophon's own earthly paradise--quite Tennysonian.

C1.37. An important point or principle in Xenophon's political theory
--indeed the key and tone of it: no one has a right to command except
by virtue of personal superiority.

C1.40 foll. "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the
morning!" The section, if, as I think it is, by Xenophon, throws light
on the nature and composition of the book. The author isn't so
disengaged from "history" that he can set aside obviously integral
parts of the Persian system traceable to Cyrus, or at any rate
probably original, and their false-seeming and bamboozling mode of
keeping up dignity has to be taken account of. It has its analogy in
the admission of thaumaturgy on the part of religious teachers, and no
doubt a good deal can be said for it. The archic man in low spirits,
if he ever is so, has some need of bamboozling himself. Titles do give
some moral support even nowadays to certain kinds of minds.

C1.46-48. The archic man's dealings by those of his subjects who are
apt to rule, the men of high thoughts and ambitions, with whom he must
come into constant personal contact. With them the spiritual dominance
alone will do. They shall be made to love him rather than themselves.
(The only thing just here that jars is a sort of Machiavellian self-
consciousness, resented in the archic man).

C1.46. A cumbrous disjointed sentence, but the thought of it is clear
enough. Even Xenophon's style breaks down when he tries to say in a
breath more than he naturally can. Is it a sign of senility, or half-
thought-out ideas, or what?

C2.2, fin. Does Xenophon feel the bathos of this, or is hdg. wrong and
there is no bathos? It may be said that the sacramental and spiritual
side is not in abeyance. Xenophon has to account for the "common
board" and he has the Spartan Lycurgan "common board" to encourage
him, so that imaginatively he provides this royal being with a
sumptuous table at which thousands will share alike.

C2.3. How far was this a custom among Hellenes? It reveals a curious
state of society, real or imaginary; but I suppose that at Rome in
imperial days (cf. /panem et circenses/) the theory of meat and drink
largesses being the best would hold.

C2.4, fin. The last remark is so silly (?) I am almost disposed to
follow Lincke and admit interpolation. Yet on the whole I think it is
the voice of the old man explaining in his Vicar-of-Wakefield style,
to his admiring auditors, wife, children, and grandsons, I fancy, and
slaves, the /raison d'tre/ of Persian dinner-largesse customs.

C2.6. Qy.: What was Xenophon's manner of composing? The style here is
loose, like that of a man talking. Perhaps he lectured and the
amanuensis took down what he said.

C2.8. Ineptitudes. One does somewhat sniff an editor here, I think,
but I am not sure. There's a similar touch of ineptitude (senility,
perhaps) in the /Memorabilia/, /ad fin/. On the other hand I can
imagine Xenophon purring over this side of Orientalism quite
naturally.

C2.12. This slipshod style, how accounted for? The most puzzling thing
of all is the sort of mental confusion between Cyrus and the king in
general.

C2.15-16. Thoroughly Xenophontine and Ruskinian and eternal.

C2.24. Here is the germ of benefit societies and clubs and insurances
and hospitals. Xenophon probably learns it all from Ctesias, and
others of the sort. Cyrus provides doctors and instruments and
medicines and diet, in fact, all the requisites of a hospital, in his
palace. Nor does he forget to be grateful to the doctors who cured the
sick. [Ctesias, the Greek physician to the Persian king. See
/Anabasis/, I. viii. Works, Vol. I. p. 108.]

C2.26 ff. Xenophon's Machiavellianism. Does it work?

C2.17-28. It seems to me that all this is too elaborate for an
interpolator: it smacks of Xenophon in his arm-chair, theorising and
half-dreaming over his political philosophy.

C3.2. Prototype, a procession to Eleusis or elsewhere: the
Panathenaic, possibly. Xenophon's sumptuous taste and love of bright
colours.

C3.3, fin., C3.4. What a curious prototypic sound! Truly this is the
very /modus/ of the evangelist's type of sentence. His narrative must
run in this mould.

C3.4, fin. This is the old Cyrus. It comes in touchingly here, this
refrain of the old song, now an echo of the old life.

C3.14. Xenophon delights somewhat in this sort of scene. It is a
turning-point, a veritable moral peripety, though the decisive step
was taken long ago. What is Xenophon's intention with regard to it?
Has he any /parti pris/, for or against? Does he wish us to draw
conclusions? Or does it correspond to a moral meeting of the waters in
his own mind? Here love of Spartan simplicity, and there of splendour
and regality and monarchism? He does not give a hint that the sapping
of the system begins here, when the archic man ceases to depend on his
own spiritual archic qualities and begins to eke out his dignity by
artificial means and external shows of reverence.

C3.20. Is this worthy of the archic man? It is a method, no doubt, of
{arkhe}, but has it any spiritual "last" in it? The incident of
Dapharnes somewhat diverts our attention from the justice of the
system in reference to the suitors. On the whole, I think Xenophon
can't get further. He is blinded and befogged by two things: (1) his
(i.e. their) aristocratism, and again (2) his satisfaction in
splendour and get-up, provided it is attached to moral greatness. We
are in the same maze, I fancy. Jesus was not, nor is Walt Whitman.

C3.23. Cyrus is made to behave rather like the autocratic father of a
goody story-book.

C3.25. Realistic and vivid detailing: our curiosity is satisfied. "Who
has won?" we ask. "Oh, so-and-so, Smith." Well, it's something to know
that Smith has won. Xenophon, the artist, 'cutely introduces the
Sakian to us. One scene takes up another, just as in real life. Quite
soon we know a great deal more about this young man, a mere Sakian
private soldier, who wins the race so easily on his splendid horse.
Cyrus and good fortune introduce him to the very man he is suited to:
viz. Pheraulas.

C3.37. Pheraulas' boyhood has already been sketched by himself (II.
C3.7), the active sturdy little youngster, snatching at a knife, and
hacking away /con amore/. We know him well: Xenophon's modernism comes
out in these things. Here we have the old father, a heart of oak, like
the old Acharnian in Aristophanes. One of the prettiest morsels in all
Xenophon. Xenophon's own father, is he there?

C3.47. The desire for "leisure" is as strong in Xenophon as in hgd. or
S. T. I., I think. [S. T. Irwin, also a master at Clifton.]

C4.1. Why is the Hyrcanian never named? Is it conceivable that
Xenophon shrinks from using a proper name except when he has some
feeling for the sound of the language? (Sic. Sakians, Cadousians,
Indians, etc.)

C4.4 The "mark" system again which Xenophon believes in, but hgd. not.
Shows how he tried to foster competitiveness. It's after all a belief
in the central sun, a species of monarch-worship, logical and
consistent enough.

C4.8. Xenophon reveals himself and the Hellenic feeling with regard to
war and its use. The /pax Romana/ is anticipated in their minds.

C4.9. Hystaspas is rather like the sons of Zebedee or the elder
brother of the Prodigal.

C4.12, fin. Looks rather like a Greek joke. But what is the joke?

C4.13-23. Broad type of joke, but not unhealthy or prurient. Prototype
probably Agesilaus and the younger Cyrus at the supper-table, with
just this touch of coarseness.

C4.32-36. This is = to the Comtist theory of the duties of
capitalists, and is one of the noblest disquisitions in all Xenophon,
{os g' emoi dokei}. Cyrus' theory is based on fraternal feeling among
the /elite/ of the world, and that is the sole difference, a large one
doubtless, and measures the gap between Xenophon and A. C. and our
advance in Democracy.

C5.17. How far is this historical, i.e. semi-historical? I can't help
supposing that the commoner notion of a conquest of Media by Persia
was current and familiar to Xenophon apart from any other account,
which for his present purpose he chose to go upon and possibly
believed in.

C5.18-20. Will Cyrus take her to wife, his old playmate? All this
shows once more Xenophon's love of children.

C5.23-25. The Persian Magna Charta, parallel to that between the
Spartan king and the ephorate.

C6.1-3. (a) Satraps; to be counterpoised by (b) military governors in
the citadels, and (c) visitors living at court, but possessed of lands
in the provinces. The object is, no doubt, to create a common interest
between the nobles and the king which will keep the satrap in
counterpoise.

C6.11. The Oriental feeling again.

C6.12, fin. One of the nicest (monarchical) remarks ever uttered.

C6.13. Marked Greek Testament parallel S. Joan. 13, 13. Surely the
evangelist had read this at school: I mean, the Greek scribe who
Hellenised the evangel.

C6.23. Free trade or favoured-nation principle and commercial treaty.

C7.10. Prototype: Socrates and his sons. Perhaps also Xenophon and
his. One seems to hear his own voice addressing Gryllus.

C7.14. A very noble passage.

C7.27. That's also nice: "Summon the Persians to rejoice with me at my
joyous release;" a refined form of funeral festival--"nothing is here
for tears"--nor have we, perhaps, arrived beyond it.

C7.28. His last remark is Xenophon-Hellenic, but less edifying;
fortunately it is only the penultimate, for there is the final
{khairete} [good-bye] and message to his wife. Why was she not
present? I suppose she was at home in Babylon.

[C8. It has been doubted whether C8 is by Xenophon at all. C8.3, with
its reference to the /Anabasis/, certainly looks as though it might
have been written after his death. Some scholars have also thought the
style unlike Xenophon's, but it is clear from his marginal notes that
Mr. Dakyns did not lean towards this view. To stress the degeneracy of
the Persians is, no doubt, to make a curious comment on the
institutions of "the born ruler," but on the other hand the preceding
chapter (C7) is full of grave warnings, and, throughout, Xenophon has
been at pains to insist that everything depends on the continuous and
united effort of the ruling classes towards virtue and self-control.
Again, as Mr. Dakyns pointed out (in his /Sketch of Xenophon's Life/,
Works, Vol. I. p. cxxxvii.), the epilogue bears a marked analogy to
the account of Spartan degeneracy in c. xiv. of the /Laconian Polity/
(see Vol. II. p. 322), a chapter he took to be genuine. On the whole,
therefore, we may conclude that he would have considered this epilogue
to be genuine also.--F.M.S.]





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Cyropaedia, by Xenophon [Dakyns]

