The Project Gutenberg Etext of the Impeachment of Andrew Johnson


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


History of the Impeachment of Andrew Johnson,
President of the United States

by Edumud G. Ross

December, 2000  [Etext #2442]


The Project Gutenberg Etext of the Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
******This file should be named hioaj10.txt or hioaj10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, hioaj11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, hioaj10a.txt


Etext scanned by Dianne Bean, Prescott Valley, Arizona.

Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.

We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

******

To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
author and by title, and includes information about how
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
for a more complete list of our various sites.

To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
at http://promo.net/pg).

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

Example FTP session:

ftp sunsite.unc.edu
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]

***

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





Etext scanned by Dianne Bean, Prescott Valley, Arizona.






HISTORY OF THE IMPEACHMENT OF ANDREW JOHNSON
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
BY THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
AND HIS TRIAL BY THE SENATE FOR
HIGH CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS IN OFFICE

1868

BY EDMUND G. ROSS

BURT FRANKLIN RESEARCH & SOURCE WORKS SERIES #94

BURT FRANKLIN
NEW YORK


PREFACE.

Little is now known to the general public of the history of the
attempt to remove President Andrew Johnson in 1868, on his
impeachment by the House of Representatives and trial by the
Senate for alleged high crimes and misdemeanors in office, or of
the causes that led to it. Yet it was one of the most important
and critical events, involving possibly the gravest consequences,
in the entire history of the country.

The constitutional power to impeach and remove the President had
lain dormant since the organization of the Government, and
apparently had never been thought of as a means for the
satisfaction of political enmities or for the punishment of
alleged executive misdemeanors, even in the many heated
controversies between the President and Congress that had
theretofore arisen. Nor would any attempt at impeachment have
been made at that time but for the great numerical disparity then
existing between the respective representatives in Congress of
the two political parties of the country.

One-half the members of that Congress, both House and Senate, are
now dead, and with them have also gone substantially the same
proportion of the people at large, but many of the actors therein
who have passed away, lived long enough to see, and were candid
enough to admit, that the failure of the impeachment had brought
no harm to the country, while the general judgment practically of
all has come to be that a grave and threatening danger was
thereby averted.

A new generation is now in control of public affairs and the
destinies of the Nation have fallen to new hands. New issues have
developed and will continue to develop from time to time; and new
dangers will arise, with increasing numbers and changing
conditions, demanding in their turn the same careful scrutiny,
wisdom and patriotism in adjustment. But the principles that
underlie and constitute the basis of our political organism, are
and will remain the same; and will never cease to demand constant
vigilance for their perpetuation as the rock of safety upon which
our federative system is founded.

To those who in the study of the country's past seek a broader
and higher conception of the duties of American citizenship, the
facts pertaining to the controversy between the Executive and
Congress as to the restoration and preservation of the Union, set
out in the following pages, will be interesting and instructive.
No one is better fitted than the author of this volume to discuss
the period of reconstruction in which, as a member of the Federal
senate, he played so potent and patriotic a part, and it is a
pleasure to find that he has discharged his task with so much
ability and care. But it is profoundly hoped that no coming
generation will be called upon to utilize the experiences of the
past in facing in their day, in field or forum, the dangers of
disruption and anarchy, mortal strife and desolation, between
those of one race, and blood, and nationality, that marked the
history of America thirty years ago.

DAVID B. HILL.



CHAPTER 1. THE PROBLEM OF RECONSTRUCTION.

MR. LINCOLN'S PLAN

The close of the War of the Rebellion, in 1865, found the country
confronted by a civil problem quite as grave as the contest of
arms that had been composed. It was that of reconstruction, or
the restoration of the States lately in revolt, to their
constitutional relations to the Union.

The country had just emerged from a gigantic struggle of physical
force of four years duration between the two great Northern and
Southern sections. That struggle had been from its inception to
its close, a continuing exhibition, on both sides, of stubborn
devotion to a cause, and its annals had been crowned with
illustrations of the grandest race and personal courage the
history of the world records. Out of a population of thirty
million people, four million men were under arms, from first to
last, and sums of money quite beyond the limit of ordinary
comprehension, were expended in its prosecution. There was
bloodshed without stint. Both sides to the conflict fought for an
idea--on the one side for so-called State Rights and local
self-government--on the other for national autonomy as the surest
guaranty of all rights--personal, local, and general.

The institution of negro slavery, the basis of the productive
industries of the States of the South, which had from the
organization of the Government been a source of friction between
the slave-holding and nonslave-holding sections, and was in fact
the underlying and potent cause of the war, went under in the
strife and was by national edict forever prohibited.

The struggle being ended by the exhaustion of the insurgents, two
conspicuous problems demanding immediate solution were developed:
The status of the now ex-slaves, or freedmen--and the methods to
be adopted for the rehabilitation of the revolted States,
including the status of the revolted States themselves. The sword
had declared that they had no constitutional power to withdraw
from the Union, and the result demonstrated that they had not the
physical power--and therefore that they were in the anomalous
condition of States of though not States technically in the
Union--and hence properly subject to the jurisdiction of the
General Government, and bound by its judgment in any measures to
be instituted by it for their future restoration to their former
condition of co-equal States.

The now ex-slaves had been liberated, not with the consent of
their former owners, but by the power of the conqueror as a war
measure, who not unnaturally insisted upon the right to declare
absolutely the future status of these persons without
consultation with or in any way by the intervention of their late
owners. The majority of the gentlemen in Congress representing
the Northern States demanded the instant and complete
enfranchisement of these persons, as the natural and logical
sequence of their enfreedment. The people of the late slave
States, as was to have been foreseen, and not without reason,
objected--especially where, as was the case in many localities,
the late slaves largely out-numbered the people of the white
race: and it is apparent from subsequent developments that they
had the sympathy of President Lincoln, at least so far as to
refuse his sanction to the earlier action of Congress relative to
restoration.

To add to the gravity of the situation and of the problem of
reconstruction, the people of the States lately in rebellion were
disfranchised in a mass, regardless of the fact that many of them
refused to sanction the rebellion only so far as was necessary to
their personal safety.

It was insisted by the dominant element of the party in control
of Congress, that these States were dead as political entities,
having committed political suicide, and their people without
rights or the protection of law, as malcontents.

It is of record that Mr. Lincoln objected to this doctrine, and
to all propositions that contemplated the treatment of the late
rebellious States simply as conquered provinces and their people
as having forfeited all rights under a common government, and
under the laws of Nations entitled to no concessions, or even to
consideration, in any proposed measures of restoration. That he
had no sympathy with that theory is evidenced by the plan of
restoration he attempted to establish in Louisiana.

It was at this point that differences arose between Mr. Lincoln
and his party in Congress, which became more or less acute prior
to his death and continued between Congress and Mr. Johnson on
his attempt to carry out Mr. Lincoln's plans for restoration.

The cessation of hostilities in the field thus developed a
politico-economic problem which had never before confronted any
nation in such magnitude and gravity. The situation was at once
novel, unprecedented, and in more senses than one, alarming.
Without its due and timely solution there was danger of still
farther disturbance of a far different and more alarming
character than that of arms but lately ceased; and of a vastly
more insidious and dangerous complexion. The war had been fought
in the open. The record of the more than two thousand field and
naval engagements that had marked its progress and the march of
the Union armies to success, were heralded day by day to every
household, and all could forecast its trend and its results. But
the controversy now developed was insidious--its influences, its
weapons, its designs, and its possible end, were in a measure
hidden from the public--public opinion was divided, and its
results, for good or ill, problematical. The wisest political
sagacity and the broadest statesmanship possible were needed, and
in their application no time was to be lost.

In his annual message to Congress, December 8th, 1863, Mr.
Lincoln had to a considerable extent outlined his plan of
Reconstruction; principally by a recital of what he had already
done in that direction. That part of his message pertinent to
this connection is reproduced here to illustrate the broad,
humane, national and patriotic purpose that actuated him, quite
as well as his lack of sympathy with the extreme partisan aims
and methods that characterized the measures afterward adopted by
Congress in opposition to his well-known wishes and views, and,
also, as an important incident to the history of that controversy
and of the time, and its bearing upon the frictions that followed
between Congress and Mr. Lincoln's successor on that subject. Mr.
Lincoln said:

When Congress assembled a year ago the war had already lasted
twenty months, and there had been many conflicts on both land and
sea, with varying results. The rebellion had been pressed back
into reduced limits; yet the tone of public feeling and opinion,
at home and abroad, was not satisfactory. With other signs, the
popular elections, then just past, indicated uneasiness among
ourselves, while, amid much that was cold and menacing, the
kindest words coming from Europe were uttered in accents of pity
that we were too blind to surrender a hopeless cause. Our
commerce was suffering greatly by a few armed vessels built upon
and furnished from foreign shores; and we were threatened with
such additions from the same quarter as would sweep our trade
from the sea and raise our blockade. We had failed to elicit from
European Governments anything hopeful upon this subject. The
preliminary Emancipation Proclamation, issued in September, was
running its assigned period to the beginning of the new year. A
month later that final proclamation came, including the
announcement that colored men of suitable condition would be
received into the army service. The policy of emancipation, and
of employing black soldiers, gave to the future a new aspect,
about which hope and fear and doubt contended in uncertain
conflict. According to our political system, as a matter of civil
administration, the General Government had no lawful power to
effect emancipation in any State; and for a long time it had been
hoped that the rebellion could be suppressed without resorting to
it as a military measure. It was all the while deemed possible
that the necessity for it might come, and that, if it should, the
crisis of the contest would then be presented. It came, and, as
was anticipated, was followed by dark and doubtful days. Eleven
months have now passed, and we are permitted to take another
review. The rebel borders are pressed still further back, and by
the complete opening of the Mississippi the country dominated by
the rebellion is divided into distinct parts, with no practical
communication between them. Tennessee and Arkansas have been
substantially cleared of insurgent control, and influential
citizens in each, owners of slaves and advocates of slavery at
the beginning of the rebellion, now declare openly for
emancipation in their respective States. Of those States not
included in the Emancipation Proclamation, Maryland and Missouri,
neither of which three years ago would tolerate any restraint
upon the extension of slavery into the new Territories, only
dispute now as to the best mode of removing it within their own
limits.

Of those who were slaves at the beginning of the rebellion, full
one hundred thousand are now in the United States military
service; about one half of which number actually bear arms in the
ranks; thus giving the double advantage of taking so much labor
from the insurgent cause, and supplying the places which must
otherwise be filled with so many white men. So far as tested, it
is difficult to say they are not as good soldiers as any. No
servile insurrection, or tendency to violence or cruelty, has
marked the measure of emancipation and arming the blacks. Those
measures have been discussed in foreign countries, and
contemporary with such discussion the tone of sentiment there is
much improved. At home the same measures have been fully
discussed, and supported, criticised, and denounced, and the
annual elections following are highly encouraging to those whose
official duty it is to bear the country through this great trial.
Thus we have the new reckoning. The crisis which threatened to
divide the friends of the Union is past.

Looking now to the present, and future, and with reference to a
resumption of national authority within the States wherein that
authority has been suspended, I have thought fit to issue a
Proclamation, a copy of which is herewith transmitted. On
examination of this Proclamation it will appear, as is believed,
that nothing is attempted beyond what is amply justified by the
Constitution. True, the form of an oath is given, but no man is
coerced to take it. The man is only promised a pardon in case he
voluntarily takes the oath. The Constitution authorizes the
Executive to grant or withhold the pardon at his own absolute
discretion, and this includes the power to grant on terms, as is
fully established by judicial and other authorities.

It is also proffered that, if in any of the States named a State
Government shall be, in the mode prescribed, set up, such
Government shall be recognized and guaranteed by the United
States, and that under it the State shall, on the constitutional
conditions, be protected against invasion and domestic violence.
The constitutional obligation of the United States to guarantee
to every State in the Union a republican form of government, and
to protect the State, in the cases stated, is explicit and full.
But why tender the benefits of this provision only to a State
Government set up in this particular way? This section
contemplates a case wherein the element within a State favorable
to a republican government, in the Union, may be too feeble for
an opposite and hostile external to or even within the State; and
such are precisely the cases with which we are dealing.

Any attempt to guaranty and protect a revived State Government,
constituted in whole, or in preponderating part, from the very
element against whose hostility it is to be protected, is simply
absurd. There must be a test by which to separate the opposing
elements, so as to build only from the sound; and that test is a
sufficiently liberal one which accepts as sound whoever will make
a sworn recantation of his former unsoundness.

But if it be proper to require, as a test of admission to the
political body, an oath of allegiance to the Constitution of the
United States, and to the Union under it, why also to the laws
and Proclamation in regard to slavery? Those laws and
Proclamations were enacted and put forth for the purpose of
aiding in the suppression of the rebellion. To give them their
fullest effect, there had to be a pledge--for their maintenance.
In my judgment they have aided, and will further aid, the cause
for which they were intended. To now abandon them would be not
only to relinquish a lever of power, but would also be a cruel
and an astounding breach of faith. I may add at this point, that
while I remain in my present position, I shall not attempt to
retract or modify the Emancipation Proclamation; nor shall I
return to slavery any person who is free by the terms of the
Proclamation, or by any of the acts of Congress. For these and
other reasons it is thought best that support of these measures
shall be included in the oath; and it is believed the Executive
may lawfully claim it in return for pardon and restoration of
forfeited rights, when he has clear constitutional power to
withhold altogether or grant upon terms which he shall deem
wisest for the public interest. It should be observed, also, that
this part of the oath is subject to the modifying and abrogating
power of legislation and supreme judicial decision.

The proposed acquiescence of the National Executive in any
reasonable temporary State arrangement for the freed people is
made with the view of possibly modifying the confusion and
destitution which must, at best, attend all classes by a total
revolution of labor throughout whole States. It is hoped that the
already deeply afflicted people of those States may be somewhat
more ready to give up the cause of their affliction, if, to this
extent, this vital matter be left to themselves; while no power
of the National Executive to prevent an abuse is abridged by the
proposition.

The suggestion in the Proclamation as to maintaining the
political frame-work of those States on what is called
reconstruction, is made in the hope that it may do good without
danger of harm. It will save labor and avoid great confusion.

But why any proclamation on this subject? This question is beset
with the conflicting views that the step might be delayed too
long or taken too soon. In some States the elements for
resumption seem ready for action, but remain inactive apparently
for want of a rallying point. Why shall A. adopt the plan of B.,
rather than B. that of A.? And if A. and B. should agree, how can
they know but that the General Government here will reject their
plan? By the Proclamation a plan is presented which may be
accepted by them as a rallying point, and which they may be
assured in advance will not be rejected here. This may bring them
to act sooner than they otherwise would.

The objection to a premature presentation of a plan by the
National Executive consists in the danger of committals on points
which could be more safely left to further developments. Care has
been taken to so shape the document as to avoid embarrassment
from this source. Saying that, on certain terms, certain classes
will be pardoned, with rights restored, it is not said that other
classes on other terms will never be included. Saying that
reconstruction will be accepted if presented in a specified way,
it is not saying it will not be accepted in any other way.

The movements, by State action, for emancipation in several of
the States not included in the Emancipation Proclamation, are
matters of profound gratulation, and while I do not repeat in
detail what I have heretofore so earnestly urged upon this
subject, my general views and feelings remain unchanged, and I
trust that Congress will omit no fair opportunity of aiding these
important steps to a great consummation.

In the midst of other cares, however important, we must not lose
sight of the fact that the war power is still our main reliance.
To that power alone can we look, for a time, to give confidence
to the people in the contested regions that the insurgent power
will not again over-run them. Until that confidence shall be
established, little can be done anywhere for what is called
reconstruction. Hence our chiefest care must still be directed to
the Army and Navy, who have thus far borne their hardest part
nobly and well. And it may be esteemed fortunate that in giving
the greatest efficiency to these indispensable arms, we do also
honorably recognize the gallant men, from commander to sentinel,
who compose them, to whom, more than to others, the world must
stand indebted for the home of freedom disenthralled,
regenerated, enlarged and perpetuated.

Abraham Lincoln.
December 8, 1863.

The following is the Proclamation of Amnesty and Reconstruction
referred to in the foregoing Message, and further illustrates Mr.
Lincoln's plan for the restoration of the Union:

PROCLAMATION OF AMNESTY AND RECONSTRUCTION.

BY THE PRESIDENT ON THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

Whereas, in and by the Constitution of the United States, it is
provided that the President "shall have the power to grant
reprieves and pardons for offenses against the United States,
except in cases of impeachment;" and

Whereas, a rebellion now exists whereby the loyal State
governments of several States have for a long time been
subverted, and many persons have committed, and are guilty of
treason against the United States; and

Whereas, with reference to said rebellion and treason, laws have
been enacted by Congress, declaring forfeitures and confiscations
of property and liberation of slaves, all upon terms and
conditions therein stated, and also declaring that the President
was thereby authorized at any time thereafter, by proclamation,
to extend to persons who may have participated in the existing
rebellion, in any State or part thereof, pardon and amnesty, with
such exceptions and at such times and on such conditions as he
may deem expedient for the public welfare; and

Whereas, the Congressional declaration for limited and
conditional pardon accords with well established judicial
exposition of the pardoning power; and

Whereas, with reference to said rebellion, the President of the
United States has issued several proclamations, with provisions
in regard to the liberation of slaves; and

Whereas, it is now desired by some persons heretofore engaged in
said rebellion to resume their allegiance to the United States,
and to reinaugurate loyal State Governments within and for their
respective States; therefore,

I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States, do proclaim,
declare, and make known to all persons who have, directly or by
implication, participated in the existing rebellion, except as
hereinafter excepted, that a full pardon is hereby granted to
them and each of them, with restoration of all rights of
property, except as to slaves and in property cases where rights
of third parties shall have intervened, and upon the condition
that every such person shall take and subscribe an oath, and
thenceforward keep and maintain said oath inviolate, and which
oath shall be registered for permanent preservation, and shall be
of the tenor and effect following, to-wit:

I, ___ __ ___ , do solemnly swear, in presence of Almighty God,
that I will henceforth faithfully support, protect, and defend
the Constitution of the United States, and the Union of the
States thereunder; and that I will, in like manner, abide by and
faithfully support all acts of Congress passed during the
existing rebellion with reference to slaves, so long and so far
as not repealed, modified or held void by Congress, or by the
decision of the Supreme Court; and that I will, in like manner,
abide by and faithfully support all proclamations of the
President made during the existing rebellion having reference to
slaves, so long and so far as not modified or declared void by
decision of the Supreme Court. So help me God.

The persons exempted from the benefits of the foregoing
provisions are all who are, or shall have been, civil or
diplomatic officers or agents of the so-called Confederate
Government: all who have left judicial stations under the United
States to aid the rebellion; all who are or shall have been
military or naval officers of said so-called Confederate
Government above the rank of Colonel in the army or Lieutenant in
the Navy; all who have left seats in the United States Congress
to aid the rebellion; all who resigned commissions in the army or
navy of the United States and afterward aided the rebellion; and
all who have engaged in any way in treating colored persons, or
white persons in charge of such, otherwise than lawfully as
prisoners of war, and which persons may have been found in the
United States service as soldiers, seamen, or in any capacity.

And I do further proclaim, declare, and make known that whenever,
in any of the States of Arkansas, Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi,
Tennessee, Alabama, Georgia, Florida, South Carolina and North
Carolina, a number of persons, not less than one-tenth in number
of the votes cast in such State at the Presidential election of
the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty, each
having taken the oath aforesaid and not having since violated it,
and being a qualified voter by the election laws of the State
existing immediately before the so-called act of secession, and
excluding all others, shall reestablish a State government which
shall be republican, and in no wise contravening said oath, such
shall be recognized as the true government of the State, and the
State shall receive thereunder the benefits of the constitutional
provision which declares that "the United States shall guarantee
to every state in this Union a republican form of government, and
shall protect each of them against invasion; and, on the
application of the legislature, or the executive (when the
legislature cannot be convened) against domestic violence."

And I do further proclaim, declare, and make known, that any
provision which may be adopted by such State government in
relation to the freed people of such State, which shall recognize
and declare their permanent freedom, provide for their education,
and which may yet be consistent as a temporary arrangement with
their present condition as a laboring, landless, and homeless
class, will not be objected to by the National Executive.

And it is suggested as not improper that, in constructing a loyal
State government in any State, the name of the State, the
boundary, the subdivisions, the constitution, and the general
code of laws, as before the rebellion, be maintained, subject
only to the modifications made necessary by the conditions
hereinbefore stated, and such others, if any, not contravening
said conditions, and which may be deemed expedient by those
framing the new State government.

To avoid misunderstanding, it may be proper to say, that whether
members sent to Congress from any State shall be admitted to
seats, constitutionally rests exclusively with the respective
houses, and not to any extent with the Executive. And still
further, that this proclamation is intended to present to the
people of the States wherein the National authority has been
suspended; and loyal State governments have been subverted, a
mode in and by which the National authority and loyal State
governments, may be re-established within said States, or, in any
of them; and while the mode presented is the best the Executive
can suggest, with his present impressions, it must not be
understood that no other possible mode would be acceptable.

Given under my hand at the City of Washington, the eighth day of
December, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-three, and of the Independence of the United States of
America, the eighty-eighth.

[L. S.]

By the President: Abraham Lincoln.
William H. Seward,
Secretary of State.

How the revolted States could be most successfully and
expeditiously restored to their constitutional relations to the
Union on the cessation of hostilities, was the momentous question
of the hour, upon which there were views and schemes as varied
and antagonistic as were the mental differences and political
disagreements of those who felt called upon to engage in the
stupendous work. As history had recorded no similar conditions,
and therefore no demand for the solution of such a problem, there
were no examples or historic lights for the guidance of those
upon whom the task had fallen.

It is apparent that Mr. Lincoln maintained the indestructibility
of the States and the indivisibility of the Union--that the
resolutions of secession were null and void, and that the States
lately in rebellion were never in fact but only in theory out of
the Union--that they retained inherently, though now dormant,
their State autonomy and constitutional rights as before their
revolutionary acts, except as to slavery, and that all their
people had to do, to re-establish their former status, as he
declared to the Emperor of the French when that potentate was
about to recognize the Confederacy, was to resume their duties as
loyal, law-abiding citizens, and reorganize their State
Governments on a basis of loyalty to the Constitution and the
Union. The terms he proposed to formally offer them were first
illustrated in the case of Louisiana, early in 1863, and later in
the foregoing Message and Proclamation; and clearly indicated
what was to be his policy and process of reconstruction.

Messrs. Flanders and Hahn were admitted to the House of
Representatives as members from Louisiana agreeably to the
President's views thus outlined. They had been chosen at an
election ordered by the Governor of the State (Gov. Shepley), who
had undoubtedly been permitted, if not specially authorized by
the President, to take this step, but they were the last to be
received from Louisiana under Mr. Lincoln's plan, as the next
Congress resolved to receive no more members from the seceded
States till joint action by the two Houses therefor should be
had.

Prior to the election at which these gentlemen were chosen, Mr.
Lincoln addressed a characteristic note to Gov. Shepley, which
was in effect a warning that Federal officials not citizens of
Louisiana must not be chosen to represent the State in Congress,
"We do not," said he, referring to the South, "particularly need
members of Congress from those States to get along with
legislation here. What we do want is the conclusive evidence that
respectable citizens of Louisiana are willing to be members of
Congress and to swear support to the Constitution, and that other
respectable citizens are willing to vote for them and send them.
To send a parcel of Northern men as Representatives, elected, as
would be understood, (and perhaps really so) at the point of the
bayonet, would be disgraceful and outrageous."

Mr. Lincoln would tolerate none of the "carpet-bagging" that
afterwards became so conspicuous and offensive under the
Congressional plan of Reconstruction.

These steps for reconstruction in Louisiana were followed by the
assembling of a convention to frame a new constitution for that
State. The convention was organized early in 1864, and its most
important act was the prompt incorporation of an antislavery
clause in its organic law. By a vote of 70 to 16 the convention
declared slavery to be forever abolished in the State. The new
Constitution was adopted by the people of the State on the 5th
day of the ensuing September by a vote of 6,836 in its favor, to
1,566 against it. As the total vote of Louisiana in 1860 was
50,510, the new government had fulfilled the requirement of the
President's Proclamation. It was sustained by more than the
required one-tenth vote.

In a personal note of congratulation to Gov. Hahn, of Louisiana,
the President, speaking of the coming convention, suggested that
"some of the colored people be let in, as for instance, the very
intelligent, and especially those who have fought gallantly in
our ranks." "They would," said he, "probably help in some trying
time in the future TO KEEP THE JEWEL OF LIBERTY IN THE FAMILY OF
FREEDOM."

This action in regard to Louisiana was accompanied, indeed in
some particulars preceded, by similar action in Arkansas. A
Governor was elected, an anti-slavery Constitution adopted, a
State Government duly installed, and Senators and Representatives
in Congress elected, but were refused admission by Congress. Mr.
Sumner, when the credentials of the Senators-elect were
presented, foreshadowing the position to be taken by the
Republican leaders, offered a resolution declaring that "a State
pretending to secede from the Union, and battling against the
General Government to maintain that position, must be regarded as
a rebel State subject to military occupation and without
representation on this floor until it has been readmitted by a
vote of both Houses of Congress; and the Senate will decline to
receive any such application from any such rebel State until
after such a vote by both Houses."

A few weeks later, on the 27th of June, 1864, this resolution was
in effect reported back to the Senate by the Judiciary Committee,
to which it had been referred, and adopted by a vote of 27 to 6.
The same action was had in the House of Representatives on the
application of the Representatives-elect from Arkansas for
admission to that body.

This was practically the declaration of a rupture between the
President and Congress on the question of Reconstruction. It was
a rebuke to Mr. Lincoln for having presumed to treat the seceded
States as still in any sense States of the Union. It was in
effect a declaration that those States had successfully
seceded--that their elimination from the Union was an
accomplished fact--that the Union of the States had been
broken--and that the only method left for their return that would
be considered by Congress was as conquered and outlying
provinces, not even as Territories with the right of such to
membership in the Union; and should be governed accordingly until
such time as Congress should see fit (IF EVER, to use the
language of Mr. Stevens in the House) to devise and establish
some form whereby they could be annexed to or re-incorporated
into the Union.

It was at this point--on the great question of Reconstruction, or
more properly of Restoration--that the disagreements originated
between the Executive and Congress which finally culminated in
the impeachment of Mr. Lincoln's successor; and that condition of
strained relations was measurably intensified when, on the
following July 4th, a bill was passed by Congress making
provision for the reorganization and admission of the revolted
States on the extreme lines indicated by the above action of
Congress and containing the very extraordinary provision that the
President, AFTER OBTAINING THE CONSENT OF CONGRESS, shall
recognize the State Government so established. That measure was
still another and more marked rebuke by Congress to the President
for having presumed to initiate a system of restoration without
its consultation and advice. Naturally Mr. Lincoln was not in a
mood to meekly accept the rebuke so marked and manifestly
intended; and so the bill not having passed Congress till within
the ten days preceding its adjournment allowed by the
Constitution for its consideration by the President, and as it
proposed to undo the work he had done, he failed to return it to
Congress--"pocketed" it--and it therefore fell. He was not in a
mood to accept a Congressional rebuke. He had given careful study
to the duties, the responsibilities, and the limitations of the
respective Departments of, the Government, and was not willing
that his judgment should be revised, or his course censured,
however indirectly, by any of its co-ordinate branches.

Four days after the session had closed, he issued a Proclamation
in which he treated the bill merely as the expression of an
opinion by Congress as to the best plan of Reconstruction--"which
plan," he remarked, "it is now thought fit to lay before the
people for their consideration."

He further stated in this Proclamation that he had already
presented one plan of restoration, and that he was "unprepared by
a formal approval of this bill to be inflexibly committed to any
single plan of restoration, and was unprepared to declare that
the free State Constitutions and Governments already adopted and
installed in Louisiana and Arkansas, shall be set aside and held
for naught, thereby repelling and discouraging the loyal citizens
who have set up the same as to further effort, and unprepared to
declare a constitutional competency in Congress to abolish
slavery in the States, though sincerely hoping that a
constitutional amendment abolishing slavery in all the States
might be adopted."

While, with these objections, Mr. Lincoln could not approve the
bill, he concluded his Proclamation with these words:

"Nevertheless, I am fully satisfied with the plan of restoration
contained in the bill as one very proper for the loyal people of
any State choosing to adopt it, and I am and at all times shall
be prepared to give Executive aid and assistance to any such
people as soon as military resistance to the United States shall
have been suppressed in any such State and the people thereof
shall have sufficiently returned to their obedience to the
Constitution and laws of the United States--in which Military
Governors will be appointed with directions to proceed according
to the bill."

"It must be frankly admitted," says Mr. Blaine in reciting this
record in his 'Thirty Years of Congress,' that Mr. Lincoln's
course was in some of its respects extraordinary. It met with
almost unanimous dissent on the part of the Republican members,
and violent criticism from the more radical members of both
Houses. * * * Fortunately, the Senators and Representatives had
returned to their States and Districts before the Reconstruction
Proclamation was issued, and found the people united and
enthusiastic in Mr. Lincoln's support."

In the last speech Mr. Lincoln ever made, (April 11th, 1865)
referring to the twelve thousand men who had organized the
Louisiana Government, (on the one-tenth basis) he said:

"If we now reject and spurn them, we do our utmost to disorganize
and disperse them. We say to the white man, you are worthless, or
worse. We will neither help you or be helped by you. To the black
man we say, 'this cup of liberty which these, your old masters
hold to your lips, we will dash from you, and leave you to the
chances of gathering the spilled and scattered contents IN SOME
VAGUE AND UNDEFINED WHEN AND WHERE AND HOW.' If this course,
discouraging and paralyzing to both white and black, has any
tendency to bring Louisiana into proper practical relations with
the Union, I have so far been unable to perceive it. If, on the
contrary, they reorganize and sustain the new Government of
Louisiana, the converse of all this is made true. We encourage
the hearts and nerve the arms of twelve thousand men to adhere to
their work and argue for it, and proselyte for it, and fight for
it, and grow it, and ripen it to a complete success. The colored
man, too, in seeing all united for him, is inspired with
vigilance and with energy and daring to the same end. Grant that
he desires the elective franchise. HE WILL YET ATTAIN IT SOONER
BY SAVING THE ALREADY ADVANCED STEPS TOWARD IT THAN BY RUNNING
BACK OVER THEM. Concede that the new Government of Louisiana is
only to what it should be as the egg to the fowl; we shall sooner
have the fowl by hatching the egg than by smashing it."

It is manifest that Mr. Lincoln intuitively foresaw the danger of
a great body of the people becoming accustomed to government by
military power, and sought to end it by the speediest practicable
means. As he expressed it, "We must begin and mould from
disorganized and discordant elements: nor is it a small
additional embarrassment that we, the loyal people, differ among
ourselves as to the mode, manner, and measure of reconstruction."

Louisiana was wholly in possession of the Union forces and under
loyal influence in 1863, and in his judgment the time had come
for reconstructive action in that state--not merely for the
purpose of strengthening and crystallizing the Union sentiment
there, at a great gate-way of commerce, that would become a
conspicuous object-lesson to foreign governments in behalf of
more favorable influences abroad, but also to the encouragement
of Union men and the discouragement of the rebellion in all the
other revolted States. He had fortified his own judgment, as he
frankly declared, "by submitting the Louisiana plan in advance to
every member of the Cabinet, and every member approved it."

The steps taken in Louisiana were to be but a beginning. The
nature of subsequent proceedings on his part must be governed by
the success of this--that under then existing conditions it was
inexpedient, in view of further possible complications, to
forecast further proceedings, and especially to attempt to
establish, at the outset, and under the chaotic conditions of the
time, a general system of reconstruction applicable to all the
States and to varying conditions. So the beginning was made in
Louisiana. It is manifest that the purpose of this immediate
action was two-fold--not only to restore Louisiana to the Union
at the earliest practicable day--but also to so far establish a
process of general restoration before Congress should reconvene
at the coming December session, that there would be no sufficient
occasion or excuse for interfering with his work by the
application of the exasperating conditions that had been
foreshadowed by that body.

On this point Mr. Welles, his Secretary of the Navy, testifies
that at the close of a Cabinet meeting held immediately preceding
Mr. Lincoln's death, "Mr. Stanton made some remarks on the
general condition of affairs and the new phase and duties upon
which we were about to enter. He alluded to the great solicitude
which the President felt on this subject, his frequent recurrence
to the necessity of establishing civil governments and preserving
order in the rebel States. Like the rest of the Cabinet,
doubtless, he had given this subject much consideration, and with
a view of having something practical on which to base action, he
had drawn up a rough plan or ordinance which he had handed to the
President.

"The President said he proposed to bring forward that subject,
although he had not had time as yet to give much attention to the
details of the paper which the Secretary of War had given him
only the day before; but that it was substantially, in its
general scope, the plan which we had sometimes talked over in
Cabinet meetings. We should probably make some modifications,
prescribe further details; there were some suggestions which he
should wish to make, and he desired all to bring their minds to
the question, for no greater or more important one could come
before us, or any future Cabinet. He thought it providential
that, this great rebellion was crushed just as Congress had
adjourned, AND THERE WERE NONE OF THE DISTURBING ELEMENTS OF THAT
BODY TO HINDER AND EMBARRASS US. If we were wise and discreet, we
should reanimate, the States and get their governments in
successful operation, with order prevailing and the Union
reestablished, BEFORE CONGRESS CAME TOGETHER IN DECEMBER. This he
thought important. We could do better, accomplish more without
than with them. There were men in Congress who, if their motives
were good, were nevertheless impracticable, and who possessed
feelings of hate and vindictiveness in which he did not
sympathize and could not participate. Each House of Congress, he
said, had the undoubted right to receive or reject members, the
Executive had no control in this matter. But Congress had NOTHING
TO DO WITH THE STATE GOVERNMENTS, which the President could
recognize, and under existing laws treat as other States, give
the same mail facilities, collect taxes, appoint judges,
marshals, collectors, etc., subject, of course, to confirmation.
There were men who objected to these views, BUT THEY WERE NOT
HERE, AND WE MUST MAKE HASTE TO DO OUR DUTY BEFORE THEY CAME
HERE."

The subjugated States were in a condition that could not be
safely permitted to continue for any indefinite period. It would
be inconsistent with the purpose of the war, incongruous to the
American system and idea of government, and antagonistic to
American political, or even commercial or social autonomy.
Naturally upon Mr. Lincoln would fall largely the duty and
responsibility of formulating and inaugurating some method of
restoration. With the abolition of slavery, the most difficult of
settlement of all the obstacles in the way of reconstruction had
been removed. Naturally, too, during the later months of the war,
when it became manifest that the end of the struggle was near,
the question of reconstruction and the methods whereby it could
be most naturally, speedily, and effectively accomplished, came
uppermost in his mind. A humane, just man, and a sincere,
broad-brained, patriot and far-seeing statesman, he instinctively
rejected the many drastic schemes which filled a large portion of
the public press of the North and afterwards characterized many
of the suggestions of Congressional action. With him the prime
purpose of the war was the preservation of the political,
territorial and economic integrity of the Republic--in a word, to
restore the Union, without needless humiliation to the defeated
party, or the imposition of unnecessarily rigorous terms which
could but result in future frictions--without slavery--and yet
with sufficient safeguards against future disloyal association of
the sections; and that purpose had been approved by an
overwhelming majority of the people in his re-election in 1864.

In these purposes and methods Mr. Lincoln appears to have had the
active sympathy and co-operation of his entire Cabinet, more
especially of Mr. Stanton, his Secretary of War. Indeed, Mr.
Stanton is understood, from the record, to have been the joint
author, with Mr. Lincoln, of the plan of reconstruction agreed
upon at the later meetings of the Cabinet immediately prior to
Mr. Lincoln's death. Mr. Stanton proposed to put it in the form
of a military order--Mr. Lincoln made an Executive order. The
plan was embodied in what afterwards became known as the "North
Carolina Proclamation," determined upon by Mr. Lincoln at his
last Cabinet meeting and promulgated by Mr. Johnson shortly after
his accession to the Presidency as Mr. Lincoln's successor, and
is inserted in a subsequent chapter.

Mr. Lincoln unquestionably comprehended the peculiar conditions
under which the Republican party had come to the control of the
legislative branch of the Government, and fully realized the
incapacity of the dominant element in that control for the
delicate work of restoration and reconstruction--leading a
conquered and embittered people back peacefully and successfully,
without unnecessary friction, into harmonious relations to the
Union.

No such responsibility, no such herculean task, had ever before,
in the history of civilization, devolved upon any ruler or
political party.

Mr. Lincoln seems to have realized the incapacity of party
leaders brought to the surface by the tumult and demoralization
of the time, whose only exploits and experiences were in the line
of destruction and who must approach the task with divided
counsel, to cope successfully with the delicate and responsible
work of restoration the close of the war had made imperative. He
comprehended the incongruities which characterized that great
party better than its professed leaders, and foresaw the futility
of any effort on its part, at that time and in its then temper,
to the early establishment of any coherent or successful method
of restoration. Hence, unquestionably, his prompt action in that
behalf, and his failure to call the Congress into special
session, to the end that there should be no time unnecessarily
consumed and lost in the institution of some efficient form of
civil government in the returning States--some form that would
have the sanction of intelligent authority competent to restore
and enforce public order, without the dangers of delay and
consequent disorder that must result, and did afterwards result,
from the protracted debates sure to follow and did follow the
sudden precipitation of the questions of reconstruction and
reconciliation upon a mass of Congressmen totally inexperienced
in the anomalous conditions of that time, or in the methods most
needed for their correction.

That Mr. Lincoln contemplated the ultimate and not remote
enfranchisement of the late slaves, is manifest from his
suggestion to Gov. Hahn, of Louisiana, hereinbefore quoted in
connection with the then approaching Convention for the
re-establishment of State Government there, and again still more
manifest from his last public utterance on April 11, 1865,
deprecating the rejection by Congress of his plan for the
restoration of Louisiana, in which, he said, speaking of that
action by Congress rejecting the Louisiana bill: "Grant that the
colored male desires the elective franchise. He will attain it
sooner by saving the already advanced steps towards it than by
running back over them."

It is also apparent in the light of the succeeding history of
that time and of that question, that if Mr. Lincoln's views had
been seconded by Congress, the enfranchisement of the negro would
have been, though delayed, as certain of accomplishment, and of a
vastly higher and more satisfactory plane--and the country saved
the years of friction and disgraceful public disorder that
characterized the enforcement of the Congressional plan
afterwards adopted.

As to the success of Mr. Lincoln's plans, had they been
sanctioned, or even had they not been repudiated by Congress, Mr.
Blaine, in his book, asserts that Mr. Lincoln, "By his four years
of considerate and successful administration, by his patient and
positive trust in the ultimate triumph of the Union, realized at
last as he stood upon the edge of the grave--he had acquired so
complete an ascendancy over the public, control in the loyal
states, that ANY POLICY MATURED AND ANNOUNCED BY HIM WOULD HAVE
BEEN ACCEPTED BY A VAST MAJORITY OF HIS COUNTRYMEN."

It was indicative of the sagacious foresight of Mr. Lincoln that
he did not call the Congress into special session at the close of
the war, as would have been natural and usual, before attempting
the establishment of any method for the restoration of the
revolted States. The fact that he did not do so, but was making
preparations to proceed immediately in that work on his own lines
and in accordance with his own ideas, and with the hearty accord
of his entire Cabinet, of itself affords proof that he was
apprehensive of obstruction from the same element of his party
that subsequently arose in opposition to Mr. Johnson on that
question, and that he preferred to put his plans into operation
before the assembling of Congress in the next regular winter
session, in order that he might be able then to show palpable
results, and induce Congress to accept and follow up a humane,
peaceful and satisfactory system of reconstruction. Mr. Lincoln
undoubtedly hoped thus to avoid unnecessary friction. Having the
quite unlimited confidence of the great mass of the people of the
country, of both parties and on both sides of the line of
hostilities, there seem to be excellent reasons for believing
that he would have succeeded, and that the extraordinary and
exasperating differences and local turmoils that followed the
drastic measures which were afterward adopted by Congress over
the President's vetoes, would have been in a very large degree
avoided, and THERE WOULD HAVE BEEN NO IMPEACHMENT--either of Mr.
Lincoln had he lived, or of Mr. Johnson after him.

It was the misfortune of the time, and of the occasion, which
determined Mr. Lincoln to institute a plan of restoration during
the interim of Congress, that the Republican party, then in
absolute control of Congress, was in no sense equipped for such a
work. Its first and great mission had been the destruction of
slavery. Though not phrased in formal fashion, that was the logic
of its creation and existence. It was brought into being purely
as an anti-slavery party, illustrated in the fact that its
membership included every pronounced anti-slavery man, known as
abolitionists, in the United States. All its energies, during all
its life up to the close of the war had been bent to that end. It
had been born and bred to the work of destruction. It came to
destroy slavery, and its forces had been nurtured, to the last
day of the war, in pulling down--in fact, did not then wholly
cease.

The work of restoration--the rebuilding of fallen States--had now
come. The Republican party approached that work in the hot blood
of war and the elation of victory--a condition illy fitting the
demands of exalted statesmanship so essential to perfect
political effort.

Never had nation or party thrust upon it a more delicate duty or
graver responsibility. It was that of leading a conquered people
to build a new civilization wholly different from the one in
ruins. It was first to reconcile two races totally different from
each other, so far as possible to move in harmony in supplanting
servile by free labor, and the slave by a free American citizen.
The transition was sudden, and the elements antagonistic in race,
culture, self-governing power--indeed, in all the qualities which
characterize a free people.

There was a wide margin for honest differences between statesmen
of experience. A universal sentiment could not obtain. The
accepted political leaders of the time were illy equipped to meet
the issue--much less those who had been brought to prominence,
and too often to control, in the hot blood of war and the
frictions of the time, when intemperate denunciation and a free
use of the epithets of "rebel," and "traitor," had become a ready
passport to public honors. It was a time when the admonition to
make haste slowly was of profound significance. A peril greater
than any other the civil war had developed, overhung the nation.
Greater than ever the demand for courage in conciliation--for
divesting the issues of all mere partyism, and the yielding of
something by the extremes, both of conservatism and radicalism.



CHAPTER II. THE BALTIMORE CONVENTION.

LINCOLN AND JOHNSON NOT NOMINATED AS REPUBLICANS.

Mr. Lincoln had been elected President in 1860, distinctively as
a Republican. In 1864, however, the conditions had changed. The
war had been in progress some three years, during which the
insurgents had illustrated a measure of courage, endurance, and a
command of the engineries of successful warfare that had not been
anticipated by the people of the North. It was seen that to
insure the success of the Union cause it was imperative that
there should be thorough unity and cooperation of the loyal
people of all parties--that it was no time for partisan division
among those who hoped ever to see a restored Republic--that it
was necessary to lay aside, as far as possible, mere partisan
issues, and to unite, in the then approaching campaign, upon a
non-partisan, distinctively Union ticket and platform.

Mr. Lincoln had given so satisfactory an administration so
wisely, efficiently, and patriotically had he conducted his great
office, that he was on all sides conceded to be the proper person
for nomination and election. The Convention of 1861 was not
called as a Republican Convention, but distinctively as a Union
Convention.

"The undersigned," so ran the call, "who by original appointment,
or subsequent delegation to fill vacancies, constitute the
Executive Committee created by the National Convention held at
Chicago on the 10th day of May, 1860, do hereby call upon all
QUALIFIED VOTERS WHO DESIRE THE UNCONDITIONAL MAINTENANCE OF THE
UNION, THE SUPREMACY OF THE CONSTITUTION, AND THE COMPLETE
SUPPRESSION OF THE EXISTING REBELLION, WITH THE CAUSE THEREOF, by
vigorous war, and all apt and effective means; to send delegates
to a convention to assemble at Baltimore, on Tuesday, the 7th day
of June, 1864, at 12 o'clock noon, for the purpose of presenting
candidates for the offices of President and Vice President of the
United States."

The delegates met pursuant to this call. Hon. Edwin D. Morgan, of
New York, Chairman of the Union National Committee, called the
Convention to order, and Robert J. Breckinridge, of Kentucky, was
chosen temporary Chairman. In the course of his introductory
address, Mr. Breckinridge said:

Passing over many things which it would be right for me to say,
did the time serve, and were this the occasion--let me add,--you
are a Union party. Your origin has been referred to as having
occurred eight years ago. In one sense it is true. But you are
far older than that. I see before me not only primitive
Republicans and primitive Abolitionists, but I see also primitive
Democrats and primitive Whigs. * * * As a Union party I will
follow you to the ends of the earth, and to the gates of death.
But as an Abolition party--as a Republican party--as a Whig
party--as a Democratic party--as an American party, I will not
follow you one foot.

Mr. William Dennison, of Ohio, was chosen President of the
Convention. On taking the chair he said:

'In no sense do we meet as members or representatives of either
of the old political parties which bound the people, or as the
champions of any principle or doctrine peculiar to either. The
extraordinary condition of the country since the outbreak of the
rebellion has, from necessity, taken from the issues of these
parties their practical significance, and compelled the formation
of substantially new political organizations; hence the
organization of the Union Party--if party it can be called--of
which this Convention is for the purpose of its assembling, the
accredited representative, and the only test of membership in
which is an unreserved, unconditional loyalty to the Government
and the Union.'

After perfecting its organization the Convention proceeded to
ballot for a nominee for the Presidency, and Mr. Lincoln was
unanimously nominated--the Missouri delegation at first casting
its 22 votes for Gen. Grant, but afterwards changing them to Mr.
Lincoln, giving him the total vote of the Convention--506--on the
first and only ballot.

Nominations for the Vice Presidency being next in order, Mr.
Lyman Tremaine, of New York, an old time Democrat, nominated
Daniel S. Dickinson, another old time Democrat and a very
distinguished citizen of that State. In his nominating speech Mr.
Tremaine again emphasized that this Convention was a Union, and
not a partisan body, in these words:

'It was well said by the temporary and by the permanent Chairman,
that we meet not here as Republicans. If we do, I have no place
in this Convention; but, like Daniel S. Dickinson, when the first
gun was fired on Sumter, I felt that I should prove false to my
revolutionary ancestry if I could have hesitated to cast partisan
ties to the breeze, and rally around the flag of the Union for
the preservation of the Government.'

The Indiana delegation nominated Andrew Johnson, also a Democrat,
and the nomination was seconded by Mr. Stone, speaking for the
Iowa delegation.

In the earlier proceedings of the Convention there had seemed a
disposition to exclude the Tennessee delegation, and Parson
Brownlow, an old line Whig, being called on for a speech,
evidenced in the course of his remarks the small part which
partisan considerations were permitted to play in the purposes
and proceedings of the Convention. He said:

'There need be no detaining this Convention for two days in
discussions of various kinds, and the idea I suggest to you as an
inducement not to exclude our delegation is, that we may take it
into our heads, before the thing is over, to present a candidate
from that State in rebellion, for the second office in the gift
of the people. We have a man down there whom it has been my good
luck and bad fortune to fight untiringly and perseveringly for
the past twenty-five years--Andrew Johnson. For the first time,
in the Providence of God, three years ago we got together on the
same platform, and we are fighting the devil, Tom Walker, and
Jeff. Davis, side by side.'

Mr. Horace Maynard, a conspicuous Republican of Tennessee, said:

'Mr. President, we but represent the sentiment of those who sent
here the delegation from Tennessee, when we announce that if no
one else had made the nomination of Andrew Johnson, which is now
before the Convention, it would have been our duty to make it by
one of our own delegation. That citizen, known, honored,
distinguished, has been presented to this Convention for the
second place in the gift of the American people. It needs not
that I should add words of commendation of him here. From the
time he rose in the Senate of the United States, where he then
was, on the 17th day of December, 1860, and met the leaders of
treason face to face, and denounced them there, and declared that
the laws of the country must and should be enforced, for which he
was hanged in a effigy in the City of Memphis, in his own State,
by the hands of a negro slave, and burned in effigy, I know not
in how many places throughout that portion of the country--from
that time, on during the residue of that session of the Senate
until he returned to Tennessee after the firing upon Fort Sumter,
when he was mobbed in the City of Lynchburg, Virginia--on through
the memorable canvass that followed in Tennessee, till he passed
through Cumberland Gap on his way North to invoke the aid of the
Government for his people--his position of determined and undying
hostility to this rebellion that now ravages the land, has been
so well known that it is a part of the household knowledge of
many loyal families in the country. * * * When he sees your
resolutions that you have adopted here by acclamation, he will
respond to them as his sentiments, and I pledge myself by all
that I have to pledge before such an assemblage as this, that
whether he be elected to this high place, or whether he retire to
private life, he will adhere to those sentiments, and to the
doctrine of those resolutions, as long as his reason remains
unimpaired, and as long as breath is given him by his God.

Two ballots were taken on the nomination for Vice President. Mr.
Johnson, whose nomination was known to be desired by Mr. Lincoln
and his friends because of his prominence as a Southern Democrat
and an influential supporter of the Union cause in his State,
received 200 votes on the first ballot, and 404 on the
second--the delegations of Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware,
Maryland, Louisiana, Arkansas, Missouri, Tennessee, Ohio,
Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Iowa, Minnesota, Oregon, West
Virginia, Kansas, Nebraska, Colorado, and Nevada, voting solidly
for him--Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Kentucky, Wisconsin and
Minnesota, only, being divided.

Thus a Republican and a Democrat were made the nominees of the
Convention, and its non-partisan character found further
expression in the first three Resolutions of the Platform
adopted, which were as follows:

Resolved, 1st. That it is the highest duty of every American
citizen to maintain against all their enemies the integrity of
the Union and the paramount authority of the Constitution and
laws of the United States; and that laying aside ALL DIFFERENCES
OF POLITICAL OPINION, we pledge ourselves as Union men, animated
by a common sentiment and aiming at a common object, to do
everything in our power to aid the Government in quelling by
force of arms the rebellion now raging against its authority, and
in bringing to the punishment due to their crimes the rebels and
traitors arrayed against it.

2nd. That we approve the determination of the Government of the
United States not to compromise with Rebels, or to offer them any
terms of peace, except such as may be based upon an unconditional
surrender of their hostility and a return to their just
allegiance to the Constitution and laws of the United States, and
that we call upon the Government to maintain their position, and
to prosecute the war with the utmost possible vigor to the
complete suppression of the Rebellion, in full reliance upon the
self-sacrificing patriotism, the heroic valor and the undying
devotion of the American people to their country and its free
institutions.

3rd. That as slavery was the cause, and now constitutes the
strength, of this Rebellion, and as it must be, always and
everywhere, hostile to the principles of Republican Government,
justice and the National safety demand its utter and complete
extirpation from the soil of the Republic; and that, while we
uphold and maintain the acts and proclamation by which the
Government in its own defense, has aimed a death blow at this
gigantic evil, we are in favor, furthermore, of such an amendment
to the Constitution, to be made by the people in conformity with
its provisions, as shall terminate and forever prohibit the
existence of slavery within the limits or jurisdiction of the
United States.

So there seems to be good ground for saying that this was in no
sense a partisan Convention, but, on the contrary, that it was a
Convention of the loyal people of the Northern and Border States,
of all parties, who were ready to lay aside party creeds and
partisan considerations, the better to make common cause for the
preservation of the Union.

Before the war, Mr. Johnson had been a Democratic Senator from
Tennessee, and during the war, a gentleman of great influence in
support of the Union cause. So pronounced and effective had been
his loyalty that Mr. Lincoln appointed him a Brigadier General
and Military Governor of Tennessee, to accept which he resigned
his seat in the Senate, and so judicious and successful had been
his administration of that office in behalf of the Union cause
and of Union men, that Tennessee was the first of the revolted
States to be readmitted to representation in Congress after the
close of the war.

So it may be said of Mr. Johnson that he was a persistent and
consistent Union Democrat of the old school--for war so long as
war might be necessary to the preservation of the Union--for
peace when the war was ended by the abandonment of the struggle
by the insurgents--and for the restoration of the Union on terms
consistent with then existing conditions--without slavery, which
was dead--and the return of the people of the South to their
loyalty to and support of the Government without debasing
exactions--after they had laid down their arms. Aggressively
radical so long as the people of the South continued in
rebellion, he was considerate and merciful so soon as they
yielded themselves to the authority of law and of the Union.

Like Mr. Lincoln, he opposed the idea strenuously advanced by
Sumner, and Stevens, and that wing of the Republican party which
they led, that the States in rebellion had committed suicide and
were therefore dead and without rights, or entitled to
consideration, even, in any proposition that might be adopted for
their rehabilitation.

This record very effectually disposes of the criticisms of Mr.
Johnson's course, so common after he came to the Presidency and
growing out of his disagreements with the extremists of Congress,
that he had deserted and betrayed the Republican party after it
had elected him to the Vice Presidency and thus made him Mr.
Lincoln's immediate successor--the facts of history showing that
neither Mr. Lincoln nor Mr. Johnson were elected by the
Republican party as Republicans, nor by the Democratic party as
Democrats, but by a union of all parties of the North
distinctively as a Union party and on a Union ticket and platform
for the preservation of the Union and the destruction of
slavery--and when those purposes were accomplished, the war ended
and the Union party disbanded and was never heard of again. Mr.
Lincoln, had he lived, would doubtless have still been a
Republican, as Mr. Johnson was still a Democrat, as before the
war--the purpose of that war and of the Convention that nominated
him having been accomplished--and under no obligations,
especially of a partisan character, to adopt or promote the
partisan purposes relative to reconstruction or otherwise, that
came to actuate the Republican party.

As stated. Mr. .Johnson had, during the later years of the war,
been acting as Military Governor of Tennessee, of which State he
had been a citizen nearly all his life. His administration had
been so efficient that Tennessee was practically restored to the
Union at the close of the War, and so satisfactory to the loyal
people of the country, that though an old line Democrat and a
Southern man, Mr. Johnson's nomination by the National Convention
for Vice President on the ticket with Mr. Lincoln for President,
was, as has been shown, logical and consistent. Though a
pronounced State Rights Democrat and a citizen of a Southern
State in rebellion, he regarded himself as a citizen of the
United States, to which he owed his first allegiance. State
Rights meant to him, the rights of the States IN the Union, and
not OUT of the Union.

In evidence of the confidence and esteem in which Mr. Johnson was
generally held by those who knew him and knew of the valuable
services he had rendered the cause of the Union, the following
letter from Mr. Stanton, then secretary of War under Mr. Lincoln,
is here reproduced. It was written to Mr. Johnson on his tender
to the War Office of his resignation of the Military Governorship
of Tennessee to accept the office of Vice President of the United
States:

War Department, Washington, March 3, 1865.

Sir:--This Department has accepted your resignation as Brigadier
General and Military Governor of Tennessee. Permit me on this
occasion to tender to you the sincere thanks of this Department
for your patriotic and able services during the eventful period
through which you have exercised the highest trust committed to
your charge. In one of the darkest hours of the great struggle
for National existence, against rebellious foes, the Government
called you from the comparatively safe and easy duties of civil
life to place you in front of the enemy and in a position of
personal toil and danger, perhaps more hazardous than was
encountered by any citizen or military officer of the United
States. With patriotic promptness you assumed the post, and
maintained it under circumstances of unparalleled trial, until
recent events have brought safety and deliverance to your State
and to the integrity of the Constitutional Union, for which you
so long and so gallantly periled all that is dear to man on
earth. That you may be spared to enjoy the new honors and perform
the high duties to which you have been called by the people of
the United States, is the sincere wish of one who in every
official and personal relation has found you worthy of the
confidence of the Government and the honor and esteem of your
fellow citizens.

Your obedient servant,

Edwin M. Stanton.

His Excellency, Andrew Johnson, Vice-President elect.



CHAPTER III. MR. JOHNSON'S ACCESSION TO THE PRESIDENCY.

THE RECONSTRUCTION ERA.

Mr. Johnson succeeded to the Presidential office on the death of
Mr. Lincoln, April 15th, 1865. The conditions of the time were
extraordinary. The war, so far as operations in the field were
concerned, was at an end. The armies of the rebellion had been
vanquished and practically disbanded. The States lately in revolt
were prostrate at the feet of the conqueror, powerless for
further resistance. But the general rejoicing over the happy
termination of the strife had been inexpressibly saddened by the
brutal assassination of the President who had so wisely and
successfully conducted his great office and administered all its
powers to the attainment of that happy result, and it was not
unnatural or strange that the shocking event should greatly
re-inflame the passions of the strife that the joys of peace had
at last well nigh laid.

It was an especial misfortune that he who had so wisely and
safely conducted the Nation through the conflict of arms and had
foreshadowed his beneficent measures of peace and the restoration
of the shattered Republic, was taken away as he and the Nation
stood at last at the open door of successful rehabilitation on a
broader and grander basis than had ever been reached in all
previous efforts of man at Nation building. From day to day he
had watched, with his hand on the key-board, the development and
trend of events. They had resulted as he had planned, and he had
become the most conspicuous, the best loved, and the most
masterful of living man in the control of the future. In his
death the Union lost its most sagacious and best trusted leader,
and, the South its ablest, truest, and wisest friend.

It was under these circumstances that Mr. Johnson came to the
Presidency as Mr. Lincoln's successor--without a moment of
warning or an hour of preparation for the discharge of the
crushing responsibilities that had so suddenly fallen to his
direction.

Actuated, doubtless, and not unnaturally, by feelings of
resentment over the manner and circumstances of Mr. Lincoln's
death, Mr. Johnson at first gave expression to a spirit of
hostility toward the leaders of the rebellion, and foreshadowed a
somewhat rigorous policy in his methods of Reconstruction in
accordance with the views of the leaders of the Republican party
in Congress who had differed with Mr. Lincoln on that subject;
but later on, under the advice of his Cabinet--notably, it is
understood, of Mr. Seward--and under the responsibility of
action--his views became modified, till in time, it is not
impossible, but by no means certain, that he went even beyond the
humane, natural and logical views and purposes of Mr. Lincoln in
that regard.

This did not comport with the purposes of the Congressional
faction that had opposed Mr. Lincoln's plans, which faction,
under the pressure of the general indignation over his murder,
quickly rose to the absolute control of Congress. Mr. Lincoln no
longer stood in their way, and Mr. Johnson was then comparatively
unknown to the great mass of the dominant party, and therefore at
a corresponding disadvantage in the controversy. He had risen
step by step to his new position from the humblest walks of
Southern life, and each succeeding step to advancement had been
made through personal conflicts such as few men in public life in
this or any other country had ever borne. It was not unnatural,
therefore, that he should have faith in himself, and in the
superiority of his judgment, or little in that of others--and
more especially when he was approached by those who had opposed
Mr. Lincoln's plans in an attitude of dictation, and with
suggestions and unsought advice as to the course he should pursue
in the then absorbing question of the restoration of the States
lately in rebellion--himself a citizen of one of those States,
and for the preservation of which, as a State in the Union, he
had staked his life.

As with Mr. Lincoln, so with Mr. Johnson--the first thing to be
done, or sought, was the restoration of the Union by the return
of the States in rebellion to their allegiance to the
Constitution and laws of the country. Mr. Lincoln, to use one of
his characteristic Western phrases, had "blazed the way," and Mr.
Johnson took up that trail. A few weeks after his inauguration he
issued a Proclamation outlining a plan for the reorganization of
the State of North Carolina. That paper was confessedly designed
as a general plan and basis for Executive action in the
restoration of all the seceded States. Mr. Lincoln had, of
course, foreseen that that subject would come up very shortly, in
the then condition of affairs in the South, and it had therefore
been considered in his later Cabinet meetings, as stated, more
especially at the meeting immediately preceding his death, and a
plan very similar to that afterwards determined upon by Mr.
Johnson, if not identically so, was at that meeting finally
adopted. That plan was set out in the North Carolina
Proclamation, the essential features and general character of
which became so conspicuous a factor in the subsequent
controversies between the President and Congress. It was as
follows:

Whereas: The Fourth Section of the Fourth Article of the
Constitution of the United States declares that the United States
shall guarantee to every State in the Union a Republican form of
Government, and shall protect each of them against invasion and
domestic violence; and whereas, the President of the United
States is, by the Constitution, made Commander-in-Chief of the
Army and Navy, as well as chief civil executive officer of the
United States, and is bound by solemn oath faithfully to execute
the office of President of the United States, and to take care
that the laws be faithfully executed; and whereas, the rebellion
which has been waged by a portion of the people of the United
States against the properly constituted authority of the
Government thereof in the most violent and revolting form, but
whose organized and armed forces have now been almost entirely
overcome has, in its revolutionary progress, deprived the people
of the State of North Carolina of all civil government: and
whereas, it becomes necessary and proper to carry out and enforce
the obligations of the United States to the people of North
Carolina in securing them it, the enjoyment of a republican form
of Government:

Now, therefore, in obedience to the high and solemn duties
imposed upon me by the Constitution of the United States, and for
the purpose of enabling the loyal people of said State to
organize a State Government; whereby justice may be established,
domestic tranquility insured, I, Andrew Johnson, President of the
United States and Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy of the
United States, do hereby appoint William W. Holden Provisional
Governor of the State of North Carolina, whose duty it shall be,
at the earliest practicable period, to prescribe such rules and
regulations as may be necessary and proper for convening it
Convention, composed of delegates to be chosen by that portion of
the people of the said State who are loyal all to the United
States and no others, for the purpose of altering or amending the
Constitution thereof; and with authority to exercise, within the
limits of said State, all the powers necessary and proper to
enable such loyal people of the State of North Carolina to
restore said State to its constitutional relations to the Federal
Government, and to present such a republican form of State
Government as will entitle the said State to the guarantee of the
United States therefor, and its people to protection by the
United States against invasion, insurrection and domestic
violence: PROVIDED, that in any election that may be hereafter
held for choosing delegates to any State Convention as aforesaid,
no person shall be qualified as an elector, or shall be eligible
as a member of such Convention, unless he shall have previously
taken and subscribed to the oath of amnesty, as set forth in the
President's Proclamation of May 29th, A. D. 1865, and is a voter
qualified as prescribed by the Constitution and laws of the State
of North Carolina in force immediately before the 20th of May, A.
D. 1861, the date of the so-called ordinance of secession; and
the said Convention, when convened, or the legislature that may
be thereafter assembled, will prescribe the qualifications of
electors, and the eligibility of persons to hold office under the
Constitution and laws of the State--a power the people of the
several States comprising the Federal Union have rightfully
exercised from the origin of the Government to the present time.
And I do hereby direct:

First--That the Military Commander of the Department, and all
officers in the Military and Naval service, aid and assist the
said Provisional Governor in carrying into effect this
Proclamation, and they are enjoined to abstain from, in any way,
hindering, impeding, or discouraging the loyal people from the
organization of a State Government as herein authorized.

Second--That the Secretary of State proceed to put in force all
laws of the United States, the administration whereof belongs to
the State Department, applicable to the geographical limits
aforesaid.

Third--That the Secretary of the Treasury proceed to nominate for
appointment assessors of taxes, and collectors of customs and
revenue, and such other officers of the Treasury Department as
are authorized by law, and put in execution the revenue laws of
the United States within the provisional limits aforesaid. In
making appointments, the preference shall be given to qualified
loyal persons residing in the districts where their respective
duties are to be performed. But if suitable residents of the
district shall not be found, then persons residing in other
States or districts shall be appointed.

Fourth--That the Postmaster General proceed to establish
postoffices and post routes, and put into execution the postal
laws of the United States within the said State, giving to loyal
residents the preference of appointments: but if suitable
residents are not found, then to appoint agents, etc., from other
States.

Fifth--That District Judges for the judicial districts in which
North Carolina is included, proceed to hold courts within said
State, in accordance with the provisions of the Act of Congress.
The Attorney General will instruct the proper officers to libel,
and bring to judgment, confiscation and sale, property subject to
confiscation, and enforce the administration of justice within
said State in all matters within the cognizance and jurisdiction
of the Federal Courts.

Sixth--That the Secretary of the Navy take possession of all
public property belonging to the Navy Department within said
geographical limits, and put in operation all Acts of Congress in
relation to naval affairs having application to said State.

Seventh--That the Secretary of the Interior put in force all laws
relating to the Interior Department applicable to the
geographical limits aforesaid.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the
seal of the United States to be affixed.

Done at the City of Washington, this 29th day of May, in the
year, of our Lord 1865, and of the Independence of the United
States the 89th.

By the President: Andrew Johnson.
William H. Seward.
Secretary of State.

North Carolina was the first of the revolted States to which this
identical plan of reconstruction, or reorganization, was applied
by Mr. Johnson. Its application to the several States then lately
in revolt, was continued till the meeting of Congress in the
following December, 1865.

On this matter Mr. Johnson, himself, testifies in his
communication to the Senate in 1867, relating to the removal of
Mr. Stanton, that "This grave subject (Reconstruction) had
engaged the attention of Mr. Lincoln in the last days of his
life, and the plan according to which it was to be managed had
been prepared and was ready for adoption. A leading feature of
that plan was that it was to be carried out by Executive
authority. * * * The first business, transacted in the Cabinet
after I became President was this unfinished business of my
predecessor. A plan or scheme of reconstruction had been prepared
for Mr. Lincoln by Mr. Stanton. It was approved, and at the
earliest moment practicable was applied, in the form of a
proclamation, to the State of North Carolina, and afterwards
became the basis of action in turn for the other States."

Mr. Stanton also testified before the House Impeachment Committee
of 1867, that he had "entertained no doubt of the authority of
the President to take measures for the reorganization of the
rebel States on the plan proposed, during the vacation of
Congress, and agreed in the plan specified in the proclamation in
the case of North Carolina."

In the first attempt to impeach the President, in 1867, Mr.
Johnson's method of Reconstruction was the most conspicuous
feature of the prosecution. It was insisted by the extremists
that it was a departure from Mr. Lincoln's plan--an unwarranted
assumption of authority by Mr. Johnson--that its purpose was the
recognition of the people of the South as American citizens with
the rights of such, and even as an act not far removed from
treason. In reference to this action of the President, General
Grant was called before the Committee and testified as follows:

Question: I wish to know whether, at or about the time of the war
being ended, you advised the President that it was, in your
judgment, best to extend a liberal policy towards the people of
the South, and to restore as speedily as possible the fraternal
relations that existed prior to the war between the sections?

Answer: I know that immediately after the close of the rebellion
there was a very fine feeling manifested in the South, and I
thought we ought to take advantage of it as soon as possible.

Ques. I understood you to say that Mr. Lincoln had inaugurated a
policy intended to restore these governments?

Ans. Yes Sir.

Ques. You were present when the subject was brought before the
Cabinet?

Ans. I was present, I think, twice before the assassination of
Mr. Lincoln, when a plan was read.

Ques. I want to know whether the plan adopted by Mr. Johnson was
substantially the plan which had been inaugurated by Mr. Lincoln
as the basis for his future action.

Ans. Yes sir: substantially. I do not know but that it was
verbatim the same.

Ques. I suppose the very paper of Mr. Lincoln was the one acted
on?

Ans. I should think so. I think that the very paper which I heard
read twice while Mr. Lincoln was President, was the one which was
carried right through.

Ques. What paper was that?

Ans. The North Carolina Proclamation.

In additional testimony that Mr. Johnson was endeavoring to carry
out Mr. Lincoln's methods of reconstruction, the following
extracts from a speech by Gov. O. P. Morton, of Indiana,
delivered at Richmond, that State, Sept. 29th, 1865, are here
inserted:

An impression has gotten abroad in the North that Mr. Johnson has
devised some new policy by which improper facilities are granted
for the restoration of the rebel States, and that he is
presenting improperly and unnecessarily hurrying forward the work
of reconstruction, and that he is offering improper facilities
for restoring those who have been engaged in the rebellion to the
possession of their civil and political rights.

It is one of my purposes here this evening to show that so far as
his policy of amnesty and reconstruction is concerned, he has
absolutely presented nothing new, but that he has simply
presented, and is simply continuing THE POLICY WHICH MR. LINCOLN
PRESENTED TO THE NATION ON THE 8TH OF DECEMBER, 1863. Mr.
Johnson's policy differs from Mr. Lincoln's in some restrictions
it contains, which Mr. Lincoln's did not contain. His plan of
reconstruction is absolutely and simply that of Mr. Lincoln,
nothing more or less, with one difference only, that Mr. Lincoln
required that one-tenth of the people of the disloyal States
should be willing to embrace his plan of reconstruction, whereas
Mr. Johnson says nothing about the number; but, so far as it has
been acted upon yet, it has been done by a number much greater
than one-tenth. * * * Their plans of amnesty and reconstruction
cannot be distinguished from each other except in the particulars
already mentioned, that Mr. Johnson proposed to restrict certain
persons from taking the oath, unless they have a special pardon
from him, whom Mr. Lincoln permitted to come forward and take the
oath without it. * * * That was Mr. Lincoln's policy at the time
he was nominated for re-election by the Union Convention at
Baltimore, last summer; and in that convention the party
sustained him and strongly endorsed his whole policy, of which
this was a prominent part. MR. LINCOLN WAS TRIUMPHANTLY AND
OVERWHELMINGLY RE-ELECTED UPON THAT POLICY.

In his last annual message to Congress, December, 1864, he again
brings forward this same policy of his, and presents it to the
Nation.

Again, on the 12th of April, 1865, only two days before his
death, he referred to and presented this policy of amnesty and
reconstruction. That speech may be called his last speech, his
dying words to his people. It was after Richmond had been
evacuated. It was the day after they had received the news of
Lee's surrender. Washington City was illuminated. A large crowd
came in front of the White House and Mr. Lincoln spoke to them
from one of the windows. He referred to the organization of
Louisiana under his plan of amnesty and reconstruction, and in
speaking of it he gave the history of his policy. He said:

In my annual message of December, 1863, and accompanying the
Proclamation, I presented a plan of reconstruction, as the phrase
goes, which I promised if adopted by any State, would be
acceptable and sustained by the Executive Government of this
Nation. I distinctively stated that this was a plan which might
possibly be acceptable, and also distinctively protested that the
Executive claimed no right to say when or whether members should
be admitted to seats in Congress from such States.

The new constitution of Louisiana, (said Mr. Lincoln) declaring
emancipation for the whole State, practically applies the
Proclamation to that part previously exempted. It does not adopt
apprenticeship for freed people, and is silent, as it could not
well be otherwise, about the admission of members to Congress. As
it applied to Louisiana, every member of the Cabinet approved the
plan of the message. * * * Now, we find Mr. Lincoln, just before
his death; referring in warm and strong terms to his policy of
amnesty and reconstruction, and giving it his endorsement; giving
to the world that which had never been given before--the history
of that plan and policy--stating that it had been presented and
endorsed by every member of that able and distinguished Cabinet
of 1863. Mr. Lincoln may be said to have died holding out to the
Nation his policy of amnesty and reconstruction. It was held out
by him at the very time the rebels laid down their arms. Mr.
Lincoln died by the hand of an assassin and Mr. Johnson came into
power. He took Mr. Lincoln's Cabinet as he had left it and he
took Mr. Lincoln's policy of amnesty and reconstruction as he had
left it, and as he had presented it to the world only two days
before his death. MR. JOHNSON HAS HONESTLY AND FAITHFULLY
ATTEMPTED TO ADMINISTER THAT POLICY, which had been bequeathed by
that man around whose grave a whole world has gathered as
mourners. I refer to these for the purpose of showing that Mr.
Johnson's policy is not a new one, but that he is simply carrying
out a policy left to him by his lamented predecessor--a policy
that had been ENDORSED BY THE WHOLE NATION IN THE REELECTION OF
MR. LINCOLN.

Again Gov. Morton said:

An impression has gotten abroad in the North that Mr. Johnson has
devised some new policy by which improper facilities are granted
for the restoration of the rebel States and that he is presenting
improperly and unnecessarily hurrying forward the work of
reconstruction, and that he is offering improper facilities for
restoring those who have been engaged in rebellion, to the
possession of their civil and political rights. It is one of my
purposes here this evening to show that so far as his policy of
amnesty and reconstruction is concerned, he has absolutely
presented nothing new, that he has simply presented, and is
SIMPLY CONTINUING THE POLICY WHICH MR. LINCOLN PRESENTED TO THE
NATION ON THE 8TH OF DECEMBER, 1863.

The following are extracts from Mr. Johnson's Message to
Congress, in December, 1865, on the re-assembling of that
body--the first session of the 39th Congress. Indicating, as it
did, a policy of reconstruction at variance with the views of the
Congressional leaders, it may be said to have been another
incident out of which arose the conditions that finally, led to
his impeachment. Mr. Johnson said:

I found the States suffering from the effects of a civil war.
Resistance to the General Government appeared to have exhausted
itself. The United States had recovered possession of its forts
and arsenals, and their armies were in the occupation of every
State which had attempted to secede. Whether the territory within
the limits of those States should be held as conquered territory,
under Military authority emanating from the President as head of
the Army, was the first question that presented itself for
decision. Military Governments, established for an indefinite
period, would have offered no security for the early suppression
of discontent; would have divided the people into the vanquishers
and the vanquished; and would have envenomed hatred rather than
have restored affection. Once established, no precise limit to
their continuance was conceivable. They would have occasioned an
incalculable and exhausting expense. * * * The powers of
patronage and rule which would have been exercised, under the
President, over a vast and populous and naturally wealthy region,
are greater than, under a less extreme necessity, I should be
willing to entrust to any one man. They are such as, for myself,
I should never, unless on occasion of great emergency, consent to
exercise. The wilful use of such powers, if continued through a
period of years, would have endangered the purity of the General
Administration and the liberty of the States which remained
loyal. * * * The policy of military rule over conquered territory
would have implied that the States whose inhabitants may have
taken part in the rebellion had, by the act of those inhabitants,
ceased to exist. But the true theory is, that ALL PRETENDED ACTS
OF SECESSION WERE, FROM THE BEGINNING, NULL AND VOID. THE STATES
CAN NOT COMMIT TREASON, nor screen the individual citizens who
may have committed treason, any more than they can make valid
treaties, or engage in lawful commerce with any foreign power.
The States attempting to secede placed themselves in a condition
where their vitality was IMPAIRED, BUT NOT EXTINGUISHED--THEIR
FUNCTIONS SUSPENDED, BUT NOT DESTROYED.

Reports had been circulated in the North, and found ready
credence with a great many, that the people of the South were as
a rule, insubordinate and indisposed to accept the changed
conditions there, and that insubordination and turmoil were the
rule. To ascertain the facts in this regard, during the later
months of 1865 Mr. Johnson commissioned General Grant and others
to make a tour of inspection and investigation of the condition
of affairs in the Southern States, especially as to their
disposition with reference to the acceptance by the people of
those States, of their changed relations to the Union, and to
report to him the results of their observations.

On the 10th of December, 1865, on motion of Mr. Cowan, of
Pennsylvania, the following resolution was adopted by the Senate:

Resolved, That the President of the United States be, and he is
hereby requested to furnish the Senate information of the state
of that portion of the Union lately in rebellion; whether the
rebellion has been suppressed and the United States put again in
possession of the States in which it existed; whether the United
States courts are restored, post offices re-established and the
revenue collected; and also whether the people of those States
have reorganized their State governments, and whether they are
yielding obedience to the laws and Government of the United
States. And at the same time furnish to the Senate copies of such
reports as he may have received from such officers or agents
appointed to visit that portion of the Union.

December 19th, 1865, in response to this resolution of the
Senate, the President transmitted the following Message to the
Senate inclosing Gen. Grant's Report:

In reply to the resolution adopted by the Senate on the 12th
inst., I have the honor to state that the rebellion waged by a
portion of the people against the properly constituted
authorities of the Government of the United States has been
suppressed; that the United States are in possession of every
State in which the insurrection existed; and that, as far as
could be done, the courts of the United States have been
restored, postoffices re-established, and steps taken to put into
effective operation the revenue laws of the country. As the
result of the measures instituted by the Executive, with the view
of inducing a resumption of the functions of the States
comprehended in the inquiry of the Senate, the people in North
Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi,
Louisiana, Arkansas, and Tennessee, have reorganized their
respective State Governments, and 'are yielding their obedience
to the laws and Government of the United States' with more
willingness and greater promptitude than under the circumstances
could reasonably have been anticipated. The proposed amendment to
the Constitution, providing for the abolition of slavery forever
within the limits of the country, has been ratified by each one
of those States, with the exception of Mississippi, from which no
official information has yet been received; and in nearly all of
them measures have been adopted or are now pending, to confer
upon freedmen rights and privileges which are essential to their
comfort, protection and security. In Florida and Texas, the
people are making considerable progress in restoring their State
Governments, and no doubt is entertained that they will at the
Federal Government. In that portion of the Union lately in
rebellion, the aspect of affairs is more promising than, in view
of all the circumstances, could have been expected. The people
throughout the entire South evince a laudable desire to renew
their allegiance to the Government, and to repair the
devastations of war by a prompt and cheerful return to peaceful
pursuits. An abiding faith is entertained that their actions will
conform to their professions, and that, in acknowledging the
supremacy of the Constitution and laws of the United States,
their loyalty will be given unreservedly to the Government; whose
leniency they cannot fail to appreciate, and whose fostering care
will soon restore them to a condition of prosperity. It is true,
that in some of the States the demoralizing effects of war are to
be seen in occasional disorders; but these are local in
character, not frequent in occurrence, and are really
disappearing as the authority of the civil law is extended and
sustained. * * * From all the information in my possession, and
from that which I have recently derived from the most reliable
authority, I am induced to cherish the belief that sectional
animosity is surely and rapidly merging itself into a spirit of
nationality, and that representation, connected with a properly
adjusted system of taxation, will result in a harmonious
restoration of the relations of the States and the National
Union.

Andrew Johnson.

The following is General Grant's Report transmitted to Congress
with the foregoing Message:

Headquarters Armies of the United States,
Washington, D. C., Dec. 18, 1865.

Sir:--In reply to your note of the 16th inst., requesting a
report from me giving such information as I may be possessed,
coming within the scope of the inquiries made by the Senate of
the United States, in their resolution of the 12th inst., I have
the honor to submit the following:

With your approval, and also that of the Honorable Secretary of
War, I left Washington City on the 27th of last month for the
purpose of making a tour of inspection through some of the
Southern States, or States lately in rebellion, and to see what
changes were necessary to be made in the disposition of the
Military forces of the country; how these forces could be reduced
and expenses curtailed, etc., and to learn as far as possible,
the feelings and intentions of the citizens of those States
towards the General Government.

The State of Virginia being so accessible to Washington City, and
information from this quarter therefore being readily obtained, I
hastened through the State without conversing or meeting with any
of its citizens. In Raleigh, North Carolina, I spent one day; in
Charleston, South Carolina, I spent two days; Savannah and
Augusta, Georgia, each one day. Both in traveling and while
stopping, I saw much and conversed freely with the citizens of
those States, as well as with officers of the Army who have been
stationed among them. The following are the conclusions come to
by me:

I am satisfied that the mass of the thinking men of the South
accept the present situation of affairs in good faith. The
questions which have heretofore divided the sentiments of the
people of the two sections--Slavery and State Rights, or the
right of a State to secede from the Union--they regard as having
been settled forever by the highest tribunal--arms--that man can
resort to. I was pleased to learn from the leading men whom I
met, that they not only accepted the decision arrived at, as
final, but that now, when the smoke of battle has cleared away,
and time has been given for reflection, this decision has been a
fortunate one for the whole country, they receiving like benefits
from it with those who opposed them in the field and in council.

Four years of war, during which law was executed only at the
point of the bayonet throughout the States in rebellion, have
left the people possibly in a condition not to yield that ready
obedience to civil authority the American people have been in the
habit of generally yielding. This would render the presence of
small garrisons throughout those States necessary until such time
as labor returns to its proper channels and civil authority is
fully established. I did not meet anyone, either those holding
places under the Government or citizens of the Southern States,
who think it practicable to withdraw the Military from the South
at present. The white and black mutually require the protection
of the General Government. There is such universal acquiescence
in the authority of the General Government throughout the
portions of the country visited by me, that the mere presence of
a military force, without regard to numbers, is sufficient to
maintain order. The good of the country and economy require that
the force kept in the interior where there are many freedmen
(elsewhere in the Southern States than at forts upon the sea
coast, no more is necessary,) should all be white troops. The
reasons for this are obvious without mentioning any of them. The
presence of black troops, lately slaves, demoralizes labor both
by their advice and by furnishing in their camps a resort for
freedmen for long distances around. White troops generally excite
no opposition, and therefore a small number of them can maintain
order in a given district. Colored troops must be kept in bodies
sufficient to defend themselves. It is not thinking men who would
use violence towards any class of troops sent among them by the
General Government, but the ignorant in some cases might, and the
late slave seems to be imbued with the idea that the property of
his late master should of right belong to him, or at least should
have no protection from the colored soldiers. There is danger of
collision being brought on by such causes.

My observations lead me to the conclusion that the citizens of
the Southern States are anxious to return to self government
within the Union as soon as possible; that while reconstructing
they want and require protection from the Government; that they
are in earnest in wishing to do what they think is required by
the Government, not humiliating to them as citizens, and that if
such is pointed out they would pursue it in good faith. It is to
be regretted that there cannot be a greater commingling at this
time between the citizens of the two sections, and particularly
with THOSE ENTRUSTED WITH THE LAWMAKING POWER.

I did not give, the operation of the Freedmen's Bureau that
attention I would have done if more time had been at my disposal.
Conversations on the subject, however, with officers connected
with the Bureau, led me to think that in some of the States its
affairs have not been conducted with good judgment and economy,
and that the belief, widely spread among the freedmen of the
Southern States, that the land of their former masters will, at
least in part, be divided among them, has come from the agents of
this Bureau. This belief is seriously interfering with the
willingness of the freedmen to make contracts for the coming
year. In some form the Freedmen's Bureau is an absolute necessity
until civil law is established and enforced, securing to the
freedmen their rights and full protection. At present, however,
it is independent of the Military establishment of the country,
and seems to be operated by the different agents of the Bureau
according to their individual notions, every where. Gen. Howard,
the able head of the Bureau, made friends by the just and fair
instructions and advice he gave; but the complaint in South
Carolina was that, when he left, things went on as before. Many,
perhaps the majority of the agents of the Bureau, advised the
freedmen that by their industry they must expect to live. To this
end they endeavor to secure employment for them: to see that both
contracting parties comply with their agreements. In some
instances; I am sorry to say, the freedman's mind does not seem
to be disabused of the idea that a freedman has a right to live
without care or provision for the future. The effect of the
belief in the division of lands is idleness and accumulation in
camps, towns, and cities. In such cases, I think it will be found
that vice and disease will tend to the extermination, or great
reduction of the colored race. It cannot be expected that the
opinions held by men at the South can be changed in a day, and
therefore the freedmen require for a few years not only laws to
protect them, but the fostering care of those who will give them
good counsel and in whom they can rely.

U. S. Grant, Lieutenant General.

This report was at once vigorously denounced in and out of
Congress, by the extremists. Mr. Sumner characterized it in the
Senate, as a "whitewashing report." The standing of General Grant
in the country at large, however, was such that few had the
indiscretion to attack him openly.

The controlling element of the party which had elected Lincoln
and Johnson, had acquiesced for a time in the plan of
reconstruction foreshadowed by Mr. Lincoln and adopted by Mr.
Johnson, but during the summer of 1865, frictions developed
between Mr. Johnson and those who on Mr. Lincoln's death had
assumed the leadership in the work of reconstruction and other
matters of administration, came to take the opposite ground, from
the first occupied by Sumner and other extremists in
Congress--that the States lately in rebellion had destroyed
themselves by their own act of war, and had thereby forfeited all
the rights of Statehood and were but conquered provinces, subject
solely to the will of the conqueror.

From that point their ways parted and widened from month to
month, till bitter hostility, political and personal, came to
mark even their official intercourse.

Mr. Johnson was practically unknown to the great mass of the
people of the North till he succeeded to the Presidency. He was
in no sense regarded as or assumed to be the leader of the
dominant party; while those who on Mr. Lincoln's death became
leaders of the dominant party in opposition to Mr. Johnson's
administration and policies, were widely known and of long public
experience, and had correspondingly the confidence of their
party.

So, in the strife that ensued, as it became embittered with the
lapse of time, Mr. Johnson was at great disadvantage, and made
little or no headway, but rather lost ground as the controversy
progressed. His moderate, conservative views, radically
expressed, in regard to what should be the methods of
reconstruction and the restoration of the Union, found little
favor with the mass of the veterans of the Union armies who had
but lately returned from the victorious fields of the South,
their blood not yet cooled after the fury and heat of the strife
while to many, who had witnessed the horrors of war at a safe
distance, with the cessation of hostilities in the field, to
which they had been only anxious spectators, became suddenly
enthused over issues that others had fought out in battle, and
vigorously vicious towards Mr. Johnson for presuming to treat the
conquered people of the South as American citizens and entitled
to the rights of such, after having laid down their arms and
peacefully returned to their homes and their respective callings.

This temper, permeating, as it did, the dominant party of
practically every Northern State, was not unstintingly reflected
upon the National Capitol in the return to Congress of a large
majority in both Houses, of men who sympathized with and
reflected back again upon their constituents the most extreme
views as to what should be the policy of the Government towards
the South.

These views characterized the legislation of the time. Partisan
rancor was unbridled, and found expression not only in coercive
legislation of various grades of severity, but in placing the
Southern States generally under almost absolute military control,
and in the practical abrogation of the common rights of American
citizenship in most of them.

Quite every act of this sort of legislation was passed over the
official protest of the President, and each of these protests
seemed but to add emphasis to each succeeding act of Congress in
that line, till it seemed that there could be no end to the
strife, so long as Mr. Johnson remained in the Presidential
office.

The ostensible basis of the disagreement which in a few months
after the accession of Mr. Johnson to the Presidency began to
develop between himself and the Republican leaders in Congress,
was the plan of reconstruction put in operation by him during the
recess of Congress that year, 1865, and outlined in his North
Carolina Proclamation. It availed not, that that plan had been
adopted originally by Mr. Lincoln a few days before his
death--that it had been concurred in by his entire Cabinet and
would undoubtedly have been carried out successfully by him had
he lived that plan was made the ground of criticism of Mr.
Johnson by the extreme party element in control of Congress,
which persistently accused him of having abandoned the plan
initiated by Mr. Lincoln, and of setting up another of his own,
for purely personal and ambitious purposes, and to the detriment
of the peace of the country.

Mr. Johnson may have been opinionated and headstrong, a
characteristic of a great many people of strong convictions of
duty and purpose; while the overwhelming numerical strength of
the dominant party in and out of Congress made it seemingly
indifferent, reckless and inconsiderate of the convictions, as of
the rights and prerogatives of the Chief Executive treating him
more as a clerk whose sole duty it was to register without
suggestion the decrees of Congress.

That Mr. Lincoln, had he lived, would have pursued much the same
policy of reconstruction, is clearly indicated by the established
fact that he had determined to adopt precisely the initial
measures thereto which Mr. Johnson did inaugurate and attempt to
carry out. But Mr. Lincoln's superior ability in statecraft, his
rare tact and knowledge of men, and his capacity for moulding and
directing public opinion, seeming to follow where he actually
led, would doubtless have secured a more favorable result. And
more than all else, it can scarcely be doubted, that the
unbounded confidence of the people in his patriotism and capacity
to direct public affairs, would have enabled him to dictate terms
of reconstruction strictly on the lines he had marked out, and
would have commanded the general support of the country,
regardless of partisan divisions, notwithstanding the well known
fact that at the time of his death there were unmistakable
indications of alienation from him of the extreme element of his
party because of his conservative views as to the proper methods
of reconstruction.

Meantime, in the effort to hamper the President, as far as it was
possible for Congress to do, the Tenure-of-Office Act was passed,
early in 1867. The ostensible purpose of that Act was to restrict
the authority of the President in the selection of his Cabinet
advisers, and his power over appointments generally. Its specific
purpose, at least so far as the House of Representatives was
concerned, and measurably so in the Senate, was to prevent his
removal of the Secretary of War, Mr. Stanton, with the manifest
if not avowed intent, as the sequel shows, to make that Secretary
not only independent of his chief, but also to make him the
immediate instrument of Congress in whatever disposition of the
Army, or of military affairs generally relating to the government
of the Southern States, the majority of Congress might dictate.
In a word, the Congress, in that Act, virtually assumed, or
attempted to assume, that control of the Army which the
Constitution vests on the President.

The first effort to impeach the President, in 1867, was based
upon a general accusation of high crimes and misdemeanors without
literal specification. The second, in 1868, was based upon his
alleged violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act, in the removal of
Mr. Stanton.

While it is undoubted, as already shown, that Mr. Lincoln and Mr.
Johnson were in accord as to the methods to be adopted for the
restoration of the revolted States, it was Mr. Johnson's
misfortune that he had not Mr. Lincoln's capacity for so great
and so peculiar a task; though a gentleman of proven patriotism,
ability, of a kindly, genial nature, and with record of valuable
public service. Hampered by his lack of political finesse and
intricate knowledge of state-craft, and in view of the conditions
of that time, and the people with whom he had to deal, it was
obvious from the outset that the result of the controversy could
hardly be otherwise than disastrous to him. Mr. Lincoln would
undoubtedly have been met by the same character of opposition,
and from the same source. But there would have been the
appearance at least of mutual concession, and while the
APPEARANCE of concession would have been on Mr. Lincoln's side,
the actual concession, so far as essentials were involved, would
have been on the other.

Mr. Johnson was a Democrat of pronounced type and profound
convictions, and in no sense did he depart from his faith. He
belonged to the school of Jackson and Jefferson. He had not the
electric intuitions and impetuous will of the former, nor the
culture and genius of the latter. He adhered more religiously to
the letter of the Constitution than either. To him it was the one
law of supreme obligation, that never ceased its guarantees. As
fittingly expressed by one of his Counsel, Mr. Groesbeck, in the
trial: "He was not learned and scholarly--not a man of many ideas
or of much speculation--but the Constitution had been the study
of his life, and by a law of the mind he was only the truer to
that which he did know."

As had Mr. Lincoln, Mr. Johnson keenly appreciated the importance
of the people of the South returning at once to the Union, free
and independent American citizens, clothed with all the rights,
privileges and obligations common to such. In his Cabinet
Councils, and to a degree supreme in that board sat William H.
Seward, as he had throughout Mr. Lincoln's administration, than
whom the Republic has produced no wiser, more sagacious, or
patriotic statesman. He gave the subject his intense devotion in
the maturity of his great powers.

There too, sat Secretary Welles, another of Mr. Lincoln's
advisers, and a devoted friend of the Constitution and the
sanctity of the Union. Each of these men, thoroughly patriotic,
and efficient, and untiring in the administration of their
respective Departments, had commenced with the deluge of blood,
and they now hoped to crown their official careers by a
triumphant peace that would Honor their lives and glorify the
Nation. These men had a salutary influence over Mr. Johnson, and
greatly modified the asperities of his disposition.

Mr. Johnson believed, as did Mr. Lincoln, that the revolted
States were still States of the Union--that all the pretended
acts of secession were null and void, and that the loyal people
therein had the right to reconstruct their State Governments on
the basis proposed to them first by Mr. Lincoln, and after him by
Mr. Johnson, and thus the right to representation in the General
Government.

It was upon this question that parties divided during the
reconstruction period. Mr. Lincoln, foreseeing danger in such a
division, was anxious to bring those States into such relation
that the people generally would consider them as virtually in the
Union, without reference to the abstract question. It was with
this view, undoubtedly, that he advocated the admission of
Members and Senators whenever one-tenth of the voting population
of 1860 should organize State Governments and ask for
readmission. He would not only not countenance, but repelled the
doctrine of "State Suicide," as it was called, and which came to
characterize the methods of reconstruction subsequently adopted.

It is true, that on many occasions Mr. Johnson charged that the
Congress was only a Congress of part of the States, and that its
acts were therefore without validity. Yet he continued to execute
those laws, and what to him was a very unpleasant duty, the law
which set aside the State Governments organized under his own
direction, so that notwithstanding his violent denunciations of
the acts of Congress, and his personal opinions, he did not
presume to act upon them. Angry and undignified language was
uttered on both sides. Many of his speeches were violent and in
bad taste and temper. So were a great many speeches uttered by
senators and members of the House, and those bodies too often
acted upon them.

It is therefore but repeating recorded history to say that Mr.
Johnson was earnestly seeking to carry out Mr. Lincoln's plan of
reconstruction, which was upon consultation with his entire
Cabinet, more especially with Mr. Stanton, adopted by him as the
basis for the restoration of the revolted States.

Yet, with these facts of record, that action was afterwards
assailed by the Republican leaders in and out of Congress, who
assumed to have become Mr. Lincoln's executors in the work of
reconstruction, as not only an abandonment of the plan instituted
by him, but a surrender of the issues fought out and the results
accomplished by the war just closed notwithstanding very many of
these critics of Mr. Johnson had but a few months before
criticised Mr. Lincoln with quite equal severity for his
suggestion of this same method of restoration.

Nor will it suffice to say that, though professing submission and
loyalty, the people of the South were still hostile to the Union,
and that there was no safety there for Union men. It is true that
there came to be violence and disorder there upon the rejection
by Congress of Mr. Johnson's plan of restoration.

These were the inevitable results of the conditions. There would
also have been disorder and violence in the North and to a far
greater degree, had the results of the war been reversed--an
arbitrary and tyrannical system of restoration insisted upon--the
established order of things destroyed homes broken up the people
impoverished, and hordes of unscrupulous adventurers swarmed up
from the South and overrun the country in pursuit of schemes of
political chicanery and personal ambition, peculation and
plunder, as was the South after the close of the war.

But when the fight was on, an overwhelmingly partisan House, as a
last resort, in the hope of at once ending, by removal, all
opposition on the part of the President to the views and aims of
the dominant party in Congress, resorted to the first project of
impeachment set out in the succeeding chapter.



CHAPTER IV. FIRST ATTEMPT TO IMPEACH THE PRESIDENT.

THE ASHLEY INDICTMENT.

The initiation of formal proceedings for the impeachment and
removal of President Johnson occurred in the House of
Representatives on January 7th, 1867, in the introduction of
three separate resolutions for his impeachment, by Messrs. Loan
and Kelso, of Missouri, and Mr. Ashley of Ohio. As Mr. Ashley's
Resolution was the only one acted on by the House, only the
proceedings had thereon are here given, as follows:

Mr. Speaker:--I rise to perform a painful but, nevertheless, to
me, an imperative duty; a duty which I think ought not longer to
be postponed, and which cannot, without criminality on our part,
be neglected. I had hoped, sir, that this duty would have
devolved upon an older and more experienced member of this House
than myself. Prior to our adjournment I asked a number of
gentlemen to offer the resolution which I introduced, but upon
which I failed to obtain a suspension of the rules.

Confident, sir, that the loyal people of this country demand the
adoption of some such proposition as I am about to submit, I am
determined that no effort on my part shall be wanting to see that
their expectations are not disappointed. * * * On my
responsibility as a Representative, and in the presence of this
House, and before the American people, I charge Andrew Johnson,
Vice President and acting President of the United States, with
the commission of acts which in contemplation of the
Constitution, are high crimes and misdemeanors, for which, in my
judgment, he ought to be impeached. I therefore submit the
following:

I do impeach Andrew Johnson, Vice President and acting President
of the United States, of high crimes and misdemeanors:

I charge him with a usurpation of power and violation of law:

In that he has corruptly used the appointing power;

In that he has corruptly used the pardoning power;

In that he has corruptly used the veto power;

In that he has corruptly disposed of public property of the
United States;

In that he has corruptly interfered in elections, and committed
acts which, in contemplation of the Constitution, are high crimes
and misdemeanors: Therefore,

BE IT RESOLVED, That the Committee on the Judiciary be, and they
are hereby, authorized to inquire into the official conduct of
Andrew Johnson, Vice President of the United States, discharging
the powers and duties of the office of President of the United
States, and to report to this House, whether, in their opinion,
the said Andrew Johnson, while in said office, has been guilty of
acts which are designed or calculated to overthrow, subvert, or
corrupt the Government of the United States, or any department or
office thereof; and whether the said Andrew Johnson has been
guilty of any act, or has conspired with others to do acts,
which, in contemplation of the Constitution, are high crimes and
misdemeanors, requiring the interposition of the constitutional
power of this House; and that said committee have power to send
for persons and papers, and to administer the customary oath to
witnesses.

The question was taken on agreeing to the Resolution; and it was
decided in the affirmative--yeas 107, nays 39, not voting 45.

On the 2nd of March, 1867, the subject of impeachment again came
up in the House, and the following proceedings were had:

Mr. Wilson, of Iowa, (Rep.)--I am directed by the Committee on
the Judiciary to present a report relative to the official
conduct of the President of the United States.

Mr. Eldridge, (Dem.)--Mr. Speaker, I wish to raise a question of
order: I see by the clock that it is almost three o'clock in the
morning; and I believe this is the Sabbath day. I think we should
not do any more business tonight, except it be business of
necessity or charity.

The Speaker.--This, in parliamentary view, is Saturday. The clerk
will read the report submitted by the gentleman from Iowa.

The clerk read as follows:

The Committee on the Judiciary, charged by the House with
examination of certain allegations, of high crimes and
misdemeanors against the President of the United States, submit
the following report:

On the 7th day of January, 1867, the House, on the motion of the
Hon. James M. Ashley, a Representative from the State of Ohio,
adopted the following preamble and resolutions, to-wit:

The duty imposed upon this committee by this action of the House,
was of the highest and gravest character. No committee during the
entire history of the Government, has ever been charged with a
more important trust. The responsibility which it imposed was of
oppressive weight, and of a most unpleasant nature. Gladly would
the committee have escaped from the arduous labor imposed upon it
by the Resolution of the House; but once imposed, prompt,
deliberate, and faithful action, with a view to correct results,
became its duty, and to this end it has directed its efforts.

Soon after the adoption of the Resolution by the House, Hon.
James M. Ashley communicated to the committee, in support of his
charges against the President of the United States, such facts as
were in his possession, and the investigation was proceeded with,
and has been continued almost without, a day's interruption. A
large number of witnesses have been examined, many documents
collected, and everything done which could be done to reach a
conclusion of the case. But the investigation covers a broad
field, embraces many novel, interesting, and important questions,
and involves a multitude of facts, while most of the witnesses
are distant from the Capital, owing to which the committee, in
view of the magnitude of the interests involved in its action,
have not been able to conclude its labors, and is not therefore
prepared to submit a definite and final report. If the
investigation had even approached completeness, the committee
would not feel authorized to present the result of the House at
this late period of the session, unless the charges had been so
entirely negative as to admit of no discussion, which, in the
opinion of the committee, is not the case.

Certainly no affirmative report could be properly considered in
the expiring hours of this Congress.

The committee not having fully investigated all the charges
prepared against the President of the United States, it is deemed
inexpedient to submit any conclusion beyond the statement that
sufficient testimony has been brought to its notice to justify
and demand a further prosecution of the investigation.

The testimony which the committee has taken will pass into the
custody of the Clerk of the House, and can go into the hands of
such committee as may be charged with the duty of bringing this
investigation to a close, so that the labor expended upon it may
not have been in vain.

The committee regrets its inability definitely to dispose of the
important subject committed to its charge, and presents this
report for its own justification, and for the additional purpose
of notifying the succeeding Congress of the incompleteness of its
labors, and that they should be completed.

James F. Wilson, Chairman.
Francis Thomas,
D. Morris,
F. E. Woodbridge,
George S. Boutwell,
Thomas Williams,
Burton C. Cook,
William Lawrence,

Mr. Ancona, the only Democrat on the committee, presented a
minority report, as follows:

The subscriber, one of the Judiciary Committee, to which was
referred by the House the inquiry into the official conduct of
His Excellency, the President of the United States, with a view
to his impeachment upon certain charges made by Hon. James M.
Ashley, begs leave to submit the following report:

The Committee refuses to allow a Report to be made giving to the
House at this time upon grounds which are no doubt satisfactory
to themselves; therefore, I cannot report the evidence upon which
my conclusion is based, which I would gladly do did the Committee
deem it expedient. The examination of witnesses and the records
was commenced, as appears by the majority report, about the time
of the reference, to-wit: on the 7th day of January, 1867, and
continued daily. A large number of witnesses has been examined,
and everything done that could be, to bring the case to a close,
as appears by the majority report: and the majority have come to
the conclusion "that sufficient testimony had been brought to its
notice to justify and demand a further prosecution of the
investigation." I have carefully examined all the evidence in the
case, and do report that there is not one particle of evidence to
sustain any of the charges which the House charged the Committee
to investigate, and that the case is wholly without a particle of
evidence upon which impeachment could be founded, and that with
all the effort that has been made, and the mass of evidence that
has been taken; the case is entirely void of proof. I furthermore
report that the most of the testimony that has been taken is of a
secondary character, and such as would not be admitted in a court
of justice.

In view of this conclusion I can see no good in a continuation of
the investigation. I am convinced that all the proof that can be
produced has been before the Committee, as no pains have been
spared to give the case a full investigation. Why, then, keep the
country in a feverish state of excitement upon this question any
longer, as it is sure to end, in my opinion, in a complete
vindication of the President, if justice be done him by the
committee, of which I have no doubt,

A. J. Rogers.

The two reports were ordered printed and laid on the table.

This session of the House, and with it the Thirty-Ninth Congress,
ended a few hours later, the legislative day continuing till
twelve o'clock, noon, on Sunday, March 3rd. The House adjourned
sine die at that hour, when all unfinished business lapsed.

RENEWAL OF THE IMPEACHMENT.

The first session of the Fortieth Congress began on Monday, March
4th, 1867, and on the 7th, in the House of Representatives, Mr.
Ashley (Rep.) offered the following Preamble and Resolutions:

Whereas the House of Representatives of the Thirty-Ninth Congress
adopted, on the 7th of January, 1867, a Resolution authorizing an
inquiry into certain charges preferred against the President of
the United States; and whereas the Judiciary Committee, to whom
said Resolution and charges were referred, with authority to
investigate the same, were unable for want of time, to complete
said investigation before the expiration of the Thirty-Ninth
Congress; and whereas in the report submitted by said Judiciary
Committee on the 2nd of March they declare that the evidence
taken is of such a character as to justify and demand a
continuation of the investigation by this Congress; therefore:

Be it Resolved by the House of Representatives, That the
Judiciary Committee, when appointed, be, and they are hereby,
instructed to continue the investigation authorized in said
Resolution of Jan. 7th, 1867, and that they have power to send
for persons and papers, and to administer the customary oath to
witnesses; and that the committee have authority to sit during
the sessions of the House and during any recess which Congress or
this House may take.

Resolved, That the Speaker be requested to appoint the Committee
on the Judiciary forthwith, and that the Committee so appointed
be directed to take charge of the testimony taken by the
Committee of the last Congress; and that said Committee have
power to appoint a clerk at a compensation not to exceed six
dollars per day, and employ the necessary stenographers.

At the close of the debate on Mr. Ashley's Resolution, it was
adopted without a division, its form being changed to the
following:

Resolved, That the Committee on Judiciary be requested to report
on the charges against the President as aforesaid, on the first
day of the meeting of the House after the recess hereafter to be
determined.

Congress adjourned a few days later. It re-assembled on the 3rd
of July, and on the 11th the following resolutions was offered by
Mr. Stevens, (Rep.) of Pennsylvania:

Resolved, That the Committee on the Judiciary, to whom was
referred the Resolution and Documents relative to the Impeachment
of the President, be directed to report the evidence at this
session, with leave to make further report if they shall deem
proper.

That the impeachment enterprise was waning, and that its forces
had received little encouragement during the recess of the
Congress that had just closed, was evidenced by the fact that
there could not be mustered ayes enough to put the resolution to
a vote, and Mr. Wilson, of Iowa, moved the following substitute:

Resolved, That the Committee on Judiciary be, and they are
hereby, authorized and directed to have the usual number of
copies of the evidence taken by said committee relative to the
Impeachment of the President, printed and laid on the desks of
Members of the House on the first day of the next Congress,
whether adjourned or regular.

The Resolution was adopted by a vote of 85 to 48, whereupon Mr.
Stevens dejectedly remarked that, "after the vote which had been
taken on this resolution, indicating the views of a majority of
the House in regard to it, I am willing to abandon it. I
therefore move that the Resolution as amended be laid on the
table," which motion was agreed to.

On the 15th of July, 1867, Mr. Farnsworth, (Rep.) of Illinois,
offered the following resolution and demanded the previous
question thereon:

Resolved, That the Committee on the Judiciary be discharged from
the further consideration of the question of the Impeachment of
the President of the United States, and that the testimony
already taken by said committee be printed for the use of the
House.

The resolution was not seconded, and went over under the rules.

On the 25th of Nov. 1867, Mr. Boutwell (Rep.), on behalf of the
Judiciary Committee, submitted the report of the majority of that
committee, of the testimony taken in behalf of the proposed
impeachment of the President. The report recommended his
impeachment.

Mr. Wilson, submitted the report of the minority of the Committee
(himself and Mr. Woodbridge), and moved the adoption of the
following resolution:

Resolved, That the Committee on the Judiciary be discharged from
the further consideration of the proposed impeachment of the
President of the United States, and that the subject be laid upon
the table.

Mr. Marshall, on behalf of himself and Mr. Eldridge, the two
Democratic members of the committee, stated that though they had
not signed the minority report submitted by Mr. Wilson, they
joined in support of the resolution submitted by him, and asked
leave to introduce and have printed separate views.

This, the first session of the Fortieth Congress, then adjourned,
Dec. 2nd, 1867.

The second session of the Fortieth Congress was begun on the same
day, and on the 5th, the impeachment question came up in its
order in the House, on the resolution reported from the Judiciary
Committee:

That Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, be impeached
of high crimes and misdemeanors.

After a brief discussion of the order of business, the House
adjourned for that day.

The debate was closed on the 6th, by Messrs. Boutwell and Wilson,
the members of the Committee on the Judiciary having Charge of
the impeachment measure. The closing passages of Mr. Boutwell's
speech were as follows:

What is our position to-day? Can this House and the Senate, with
the knowledge they have of the Presidents purposes and of the
character of the men who surround him, give him the necessary
power? (to remove alleged dishonest officials.) Do they not feel
that if he be alloyed such power these places will be given to
worse men? Hence, I say that with Mr. Johnson in office from this
time until the 4th of March, 1869, there is no remedy for these
grievances. These are considerations why we should not hesitate
to do that which justice authorizes us to do if we believe that
the President has been guilty of impeachable offenses.

Mr. Speaker, all rests here. To this House is given by the
Constitution the sole power of impeachment; and this power of
impeachment furnishes the only means by which we can secure the
execution of the laws, and those of our fellow citizens who
desire the administration of the law ought to sustain this House
while it executes that great law which is in its hands and which
is nowhere else, while it performs a high and solemn duty resting
on it by which that man who has been the chief violator of law
shall be removed, and without which there can be no execution of
the law any where. Therefore the whole responsibility, whatever
it may be, for the non-execution of the laws of the country, is,
(in the presence of these great facts) upon this House. * * * I
think that we can not do otherwise than believe, that he has
disregarded that great injunction of the Constitution to take
care that the laws be faithfully executed, that there is but one
remedy. The remedy is with this House, and it is nowhere else. If
we neglect or refuse to use our powers when the case arises
demanding decisive action, the Government ceases to be a
Government of law and becomes a Government of men.

Mr. Wilson, Chairman of the Committee, closed the debate in the
following remarks:

The gentleman from Massachusetts has remarked that the President
may interfere with the next Presidential election in the Southern
States; that he may station soldiers at the voting places and
overawe the loyal people of those States, especially the colored
vote: and we must, I suppose, guard against the possibility of
this by his impeachment and removal from office. This position,
if I state it correctly, is startling. Are we to impeach the
President for what he may do in the future? Do our fears
constitute in the President high crimes and misdemeanors? Are we
to wander beyond the record of this case and found our judgment
on the possibilities of the future? This would lead us beyond the
conscience of this House.

Sir, we must be guided by some rule in this grave
proceeding--something more certain than an impossibility to
arraign the President for a specific crime--and when the
gentleman from Massachusetts, in commenting on one of the alleged
offenses of the President, that we could not arraign him for the
specific crime, he disclosed the weakness of the case we are now
considering. If we cannot arraign the President for a specific
crime, for what are we to proceed against him? For a bundle of
generalities such as we have in the volume of testimony reported
by the committee to the House in this case? If we cannot state
upon paper a specific crime, how are we to carry this case to the
Senate for trial?

At the close of his speech, Mr. Wilson moved to lay the subject
of impeachment on the table, and the yeas and nays were ordered.

Several motions were then made--to adjourn, to adjourn to a day
certain, etc.--which with roll calls practically consumed the
day, and the motion of Mr. Wilson went over.

The next day, Dec. 7th, the question again came up in its order,
and after several unsuccessful attempts to procure a vote on Mr.
Wilson's motion to lay the Impeachment Resolution on the table,
Mr. Wilson, by agreement, withdrew his motion, and called for the
yeas and nays on the adoption of the resolution:

That Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, be impeached
for high crimes and misdemeanors.

The yeas and nays were ordered, and the vote was yeas 57, nays
108.

So the resolution to impeach the President was rejected by the
very emphatic vote of 67 to 108--nearly two to one--and by a
House two-thirds Republican.

So ended the first effort to impeach the President--the first
formal action to that end having been taken on January 7, 1867,
and the final vote at the close, and its abandonment, December 7,
1867.

For eleven months the overwhelming Republican majority of the
House had been vigorously active in its search for evidence of
criminality on the part of the President that would warrant the
basing of an impeachment. No effort was left untried--no resource
that promised a possible hope of successful exploitation was
neglected. Republican partisans were set to the work of
sleuth-hounds in the search for testimony in maintenance of the
charges preferred, and an ever ready partisan press teemed from
the beginning to the end of that time with animadversions upon
Mr. Johnson's administration and denunciation of his alleged
desertion of Mr. Lincoln's plan of restoration, of treachery to
the party that had elected him, and a demand for his impeachment.

To be lukewarm in that controversy, or even to fail to join in
the popular denunciation of Mr. Johnson was to put one's self at
once under suspicion with the great mass of the dominant party,
and without the pale of its consideration.

For eleven months the country was kept in the throes of partisan
turmoil--and for what? Simply to depose a President who had
disappointed the partisan and personal expectations and schemes
of a rule or ruin faction which was able, under the peculiar
conditions of the time, to subordinate to its purposes a large
proportion of the dominant party of that day.

The following are the material portions of the testimony taken by
the House Committee on the Judiciary under authority of the
resolutions passed by the House of Representatives on March 7,
1867, for the impeachment of Andrew Johnson.

Eighty-nine witnesses were summoned before the committee. All of
them were rigidly examined, and several of them were called and
examined the second and third times. Their testimony fills more
than twelve hundred octavo pages of print.

The first witness was Gen. L. C. Baker, of the War Department.
His testimony related principally to a certain letter alleged to
have been written by Mr. Johnson, in 1864.

The first question propounded to him by Mr. Ashley, was as
follows:

I wish you to state to the committee the contents, as nearly as
you can, of a letter which you have in your possession, written
by Andrew Johnson, some time in the early part of 1864, to a
Southern man, giving information as to the troops about the
Capitol and elsewhere, and advice to Jefferson Davis. State where
that letter is, and give the contents as nearly as you can, the
history of it.

Mr. Baker answered that he knew there was a letter of that kind,
purporting to have been written by Andrew Johnson, when he was
acting Governor of Tennessee. That the letter was dated at
Nashville and directed to Jefferson Davis, and related to some
declared policy that had been adopted by the Confederacy--that
the letter was being used to secure an appointment--that
reference was made to troops, but nothing about localities where
stationed, or numbers, and nothing about shipment of armor, and
that the letter was stolen from Andrew Johnson's table and never
sent.

The question was then asked of the witness by Mr. Ashley:

State whether the whole import of the letter written by Mr.
Johnson, was not to turn the whole power which he possessed in
Tennessee, in a certain contingency, over to the rebel cause?

Answer--No. I did not have that opinion of the letter exactly.
From what I recollect of it, the thing was that he was making a
proposition making suggestions as to what their policy should be.

Ques.--And if they accepted it?

Ans.--If they accepted it, my impression was that he was going
with them.

Ques.--With the rebels?

Ans.--Yes sir.

Question by the Chairman.--If there are any other letters that
you have seen of Mr. Johnson's written by him to any person
connected with the Confederate Government, or proposing to change
the Administration of the Government in their favor after he
became President, or anything of a public nature affecting the
interests of the United States, please state it and state all you
know about such letters.

Ans.--I do not know of any letters of that character--or of any
other letters.

This constituted the substance of Gen. Baker's testimony. His
examination was very lengthy, embracing more of this character of
testimony, and about pardon brokerage, and other alleged corrupt
practices--all evidencing a determination and expectation to fix
upon Mr. Johnson a disposition to disloyalty and corruption, both
before and after his succession to the Presidency, but no such
testimony was obtained.

A considerable portion of the investigation was devoted to Mr.
Johnson's business and personal affairs, such as could have no
possible connection with or indicate implication in corrupt or
disloyal practices of any sort.

A strenuous effort appears to have been made by the Committee
throughout a long and searching examination of witnesses, and
constitutes a conspicuous feature of that investigation, to
establish the charges of corruption and disloyalty in the sale of
public property, railways, etc., that had been constructed and
equipped, or seized and operated, by the Government in connection
with its military operations in the South. Such an accusation had
been made with great pertinacity by Mr. Johnson's opponents, and
was also then believed by a great many people to be true.

Among the parties examined by the committee, were Mr. James and
Mr. Burns, of Nashville, Tenn., and Senator Fowler, of that
State, and also the Secretary of war, Mr. Stanton. No facts
whatever were elicited showing a privity to corruption in these
matters on the part of Mr. Johnson.

The information obtained from Mr. Stanton, however, put an
effectual estoppel to further investigation of the charge of
corrupt or disloyal disposal of public property by the President.
The following are extracts from Mr. Stanton's testimony, as given
on February 11, 1867:

Shortly after the surrender of the rebel armies, the attention of
the War Department was directed to the proper disposition to be
made of the railroads and railroad stock throughout the rebel
States which came into our possession, either by capture or
construction. It was the subject of a good deal of consultation
and conference between the Secretary of War and the Quartermaster
General. It was the opinion of the Secretary of War that it was
wholly impracticable for the General Government to operate these
roads under any system, and that it would be greatly to the
advantage of the country to make such disposition as would allow
them, its speedily as possible, to become what they were designed
for channels of commerce and trade between the States, and that
any terms on which that could be done would be advantageous. This
was especially the case in regard to the Western and Southwestern
roads, where it was said there were large amounts of cotton that
would be available to remove North, in exchange for supplies to
go South, of which it was said they were greatly in want.

Ques.--In case of the construction of a railroad by the
Government, the Government furnishing the material and the labor,
what has been the custom of the Department in surrendering such
roads to the companies claiming them?

Ans.--In all instances, I think such roads have been surrendered
in the same manner as if they had been constructed by the
companies. That subject was talked of a good deal in conference
between myself and the Quartermaster General. My own views, that
the great object on the part of the Government, was to get these
roads operated; and that to go into an inquiry as to the cost of
construction, would be impracticable, either as to the cost of
construction or as to any certain rule of compensation, because
many of them were constructed under the pressure of war, and for
temporary Purposes. The object of arriving at the cash value or
equivalent for the roads was not only impracticable, but really
of very little practical interest in comparison with the great
end of having the channels of commerce in the rebel states opened
and carried on, with a view of getting out their produce,
furnishing supplies, and getting commerce in its regular
channels. In my own view, that appeared to be the most, certain
and most speedy system of reconstruction we could adopt, and that
it would tend more to establish harmony than any other thing that
could be done by the Government. In view of all this, and after
the most deliberate consideration we could give it, it was the
opinion of the Quartermaster General and myself--certainly my
own--that it would be impracticable to make any distinction: and
so far as I know, no distinction was made in any part of the
country in reference to roads built by the Government and roads
that had been constructed by Companies before the war commenced.

Mr. Stanton was asked this question:

Suppose the Government, at his own expense, had constructed
seventy miles of railroad in one of the rebel States, and that,
at the close of the war, a company should apply to the Executive
Department of the Government for a transfer of the road so
constructed to it; by what authority or provision of law would
Executive Department be authorized to transfer the road so
constructed to the company making the application?

Mr. Stanton answered:

I do not know of any act of Congress that directly, in terms,
would authorize any such transfer; but regarding the construction
of the road, in time of war, simply as a means, or instrument, of
carrying on war, when the war was over I would consider it
strictly proven and within the scope of the power of the General
Commanding, or especially of the President of the United States,
as the Commander-in-Chief of the Army, to render that instrument
as available for peace purposes as possible. And inasmuch as the
road would be entirely useless unless it was operated, and it
would be for the benefit and interest of the public, to have it
operated as speedily as possible, I think it would be in the
interest of a wise discretion, and exercising proper authority,
to turn over that road to any company or individual who would
operate it; for, in that way, he would be applying the war
material to the only available use to which it could be applied.
* * * I would regard the rolling stock as coming, to a certain
extent, within the same principle. * * * No transfer of title was
at any time made, so far as I know, or could be made, but only
possession turned over. When the military use was no longer
required, the railroads were turned over to their original
owners, or their representatives, with permission to use them.
These railroads, their plant and track fixtures, real property,
of which the military authorities had only the possessory right
and use, but the rolling stock and equipments, and iron not laid
down, were personal property, which, by capture, or purchase, or
construction, belonged to the United States. Sale could be made,
and was made, of the personal property at values estimated by the
proper officers. That which constituted real estate, to-wit, the
railroad track, fixtures, etc., the military authorities might
abandon altogether, or relinquish control and turn over
possession to those who would make a beneficial use of it by
working the road. Being in the nature of real estate, no title of
the Government or of other persons could be divested and conveyed
by military authority, but only the control relinquished and the
use permitted during the existence of military authority in the
department where the roads were situated.

The trend of a large portion of the testimony of witnesses called
by this committee to testify as to the charges preferred against
Mr. Johnson and relating to other allegations of the indictment,
quite clearly indicated that the charges were based solely upon
common street rumor, invented and given currency in partisan
antagonism and for partisan purposes, and that the witnesses were
called in the hope and expectation, on the part of the majority
of the House, of developing proof of disloyalty and corruption on
the part of the President, and, if not criminal connivance, at
least, criminal knowledge of a conspiracy for the assassination
of Mr. Lincoln.

But these expectations and hopes, in all respects, were so
utterly disappointed, that there was pathos, at least, as the
investigation was protracted from month to month, with no
indication of the hoped for development, in the despondent
inquiry of Mr. Thaddeus Stevens to one of his colleagues of the
Impeachment Committee, as the inquest approached a close without
results--"Well, HAVE YOU GOT ANYTHING, ANYHOW?" It was more an
ejaculation of anger and disgust at failure, than a query of one
seeking hoped for information.



CHAPTER V. THE TENURE-OF-OFFICE ACT.

ITS HISTORY AND PURPOSE--THE PRESIDENTS VETO MESSAGE.

Mr. Johnson's alleged violation of the act of Congress known as
the Tenure-of-Office Act, constituted the ostensible basis of his
impeachment in 1868. As stated, it had been passed for the
purpose of restricting the power of the President over Executive
appointments. That Act, therefore, becomes a very important and
conspicuous incident in the impeachment affair, as its alleged
violation constituted the only material accusation, set out in
various forms, in the entire list of charges.

The proceedings had on the passage of that bill are inserted at
some length here, as a technical knowledge of its history,
character and purpose, is essential to a correct apprehension of
the controversy that had arisen between the President and
Congress.

The Tenure-of-Office bill was introduced in the Senate by Mr.
Williams, of Oregon, Dec. 3rd, 1866, and on the 5th was referred
to the Committee on Retrenchment. On the 10th Mr. Edmunds, in the
name of the committee, reported it back to the Senate with the
following remarks:

The joint select Committee on Retrenchment, to whom was referred
the bill to regulate the tenure of offices, have had the same
under consideration, and have instructed me to report the bill
back, with a recommendation of certain amendments, which being
adopted, the committee are of the opinion that the bill ought to
pass. I beg leave to say in connection with this report that we
have reported this bill and these amendments regulating removals
from office and appointments to office so far as concerns
officers whose nominations require the confirmation of the
Senate, and have adopted what appears to us to be a feasible
scheme in that respect, in no spirit of hostility to any party or
administration whatever, but in what we conceive to be the true
Republican interest of the country, under all administrations,
under the domination of all parties in the growth which is before
us in the future; and in that spirit I shall ask the attention of
the Senate to the bill when it comes to be considered. I move
that the amendment be printed, and that the bill be made the
special order for Thursday next, at one o'clock.

On the 10th of January, 1867, on motion of Mr. Edmunds, the bill
was taken up for consideration. As the first section of the bill
was the only portion over which there was any serious
controversy, or pertinent to this recital, only that section is
produced here. It is as follows:

That every person (excepting the Secretaries of State, of the
Treasury, of War, of the Navy, and of the Interior, the
Postmaster General, and the Attorney General), holding any civil
office to which he has been appointed by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate, and every person who shall hereafter be
appointed to any such office, and shall become duly qualified to
act therein, is, and shall be, entitled to hold such office until
a successor shall have been in like manner appointed and duly
qualified, except as herein otherwise provided.

Mr. Howe objected to the exception of the Cabinet officers from
the operation of the bill, and Mr. Edmunds responded that:

It did seem to the Committee, after a great deal of consultation
and reflection, that it was right and just that the Chief
Executive of the Nation, in selecting these named Secretaries,
who, by law, and by the practice of the country, and officers
analogous to whom by the practice of all other countries, are the
confidential advisers of the Executive respecting the
administration of all his Departments, should be persons who were
personally agreeable to him, in whom he could place entire
confidence and reliance, and that whenever it should seem to him
that the state of relations, between him and any of them had
become such as to render this relation of confidence and trust
and personal esteem inharmonious, HE SHOULD IN SUCH CASE BE
ALLOWED TO DISPENSE WITH THE SERVICES OF THAT OFFICER IN VACATION
AND HAVE SOME OTHER PERSON ACT IN HIS STEAD. We thought that so
much discretion, so much confidence, so much respect ought to be
properly attributed to the Chief Magistrate of the Nation. It may
happen that at some particular time--some people may suppose that
it has happened now--the Chief Magistrate for the time being
ought not to be invested with such powers; but the Committee have
recommended the adoption of this rule respecting the
tenure-of-office as a permanent and systematic, and as they
believe, an appropriate regulation of the Government for all
administrations and for all time; and it did appear to them
(whether the reason may command itself to the Senate or not),
that it was just to the Executive, and on the whole best for the
interest of the Nation, that he should be allowed during a recess
of the Senate to change his confidential advisers if it should
appear to him to be fit, subject to that general responsibility
which every officer must be held to the public and to the Senate
when they meet again.

Mr. Williams said:

I prepared the original bill in this case, which contains in
different words the exception contained in the amendment reported
by the Committee. I do not regard the exception as of any real
practical consequence, because I suppose if the President and any
head of a Department should disagree so as to make their
relations unpleasant, and the President should signify a desire
that the head of a Department retire from the Cabinet, THAT WOULD
FOLLOW WITHOUT ANY POSITIVE ACT OF REMOVAL ON THE PART OF THE
PRESIDENT.

Mr. Fessenden said:

The Constitution imposes upon the President of the United States
the duty of executing the laws; it does not impose that duty upon
the Secretaries. They are creatures of the law and not of the
Constitution directly. Some, and perhaps the greater part, of
their functions are as advisers of the President and to aid him
in executing the laws in their several Departments. There are
some duties that are specifically conferred upon them by
Congress. Their relation to the President, as has been well said
by gentlemen, is that mostly of confidential advisers. With the
exception of the particular duties imposed upon them by law, and
on the Secretary of the Treasury more than on the others, they do
nothing of their own motion, but act by order of the President in
discharging the particular duties of their office. * * * That
being the peculiar condition of affairs it has always been
considered since the foundation of the Government, as a matter of
course, as a general rule--there may have been one or two
exceptions, and I think there have been, but I am not very
positive on that point--that the President might select such
persons as he pleased to be members of his Cabinet. Of course the
confirmation of the Senate is necessary; but the general idea of
the Senate has been, whether they liked the men or not, to
confirm them without any difficulty, because in executing the
great and varied interests of this great country it is
exceedingly important that there should be the utmost harmony
between those who are charged with that execution.

The bill passed as reported and went to the House. That body
amended it by making Cabinet officers non-removable by the
President without the consent of the Senate, and sent the bill
back to the Senate, when Mr. Sherman said:

It (the Tenure-of-Office bill) ought to have been passed, and
probably would have been passed, long ago, if a different
condition of affairs had existed before. But when you propose to
extend that principle to Cabinet officers, a very different state
of affairs arises, and different circumstances apply to this
subject. Now I say, that if a Cabinet officer should attempt to
hold his office for a moment beyond the time when he retained the
entire confidence of the President, I would not vote to retain
him, NOR WOULD I COMPEL THE PRESIDENT TO LEAVE ABOUT HIM IN THESE
HIGH POSITIONS A MAN IN WHOM HE DID NOT ENTIRELY TRUST, both
personally and politically. It would be unwise to require him to
administer the Government without agents of his own choosing. It
seems to me, therefore, that it would be unwise for the Senate to
engraft in this bill a provision that would enable a Cabinet
officer to hold on to his office in violation of the will of his
Chief. * * * Suppose the personal relations between a Cabinet
officer and the President became so unpleasant that they could
have no personal intercourse. The Senator from Wisconsin (Mr.
Howe), says in such a case the Cabinet officer would resign.
Suppose he should hold on to his power and position--what then?
There is no power to remove him, and the President can have no
intercourse with him. Would you compel such a state of affairs?
It seems to me that it would be unwise to do so. That the Senate
had no such purpose is shown by its vote twice to make this
exception. That this provision does not apply to the present
case, is shown by the fact that its language is so framed as NOT
TO APPLY TO THE PRESENT PRESIDENT. * * * It would not prevent the
present President from removing the present Secretary of War, the
Secretary of the Navy, or the Secretary of State.

A considerable number of Senators participated in the debate,
which was able and exhaustive to an exceptional degree, on both
sides, and occupied several days in the various stages of the
proceeding.

Mr. Edmunds closed the debate in the Senate with the following
remarks:

I do not rise to prolong the debate, but only to express the hope
that the debate on this question may terminate--that we may come
to a vote. * * * While I should be glad to occupy some time in
reply to some things that have fallen in the course of this
debate, I feel it to be due to the business of the Senate to
abstain. I hope the Senate will disagree to this amendment, (made
by the House) and adhere to the bill as it stands.

The vote was then taken, and resulted in 17 for agreeing to the
House amendment, and 28 against it.

The action of the Senate was reported to the House and Conference
Committees were appointed by the two houses.

On the 18th of February, the following substitute for the first
section of the bill was reported by the Committee of Conference
and adopted by both Houses, and the bill went to the President:

Provided, That the Secretaries of State, of the Treasury, of War,
of the Navy, and of the Interior, the Postmaster General and the
Attorney General, shall hold their offices respectively FOR AND
DURING THE TERMS OF THE PRESIDENT BY WHOM THEY MAY HAVE BEEN
APPOINTED, and for one month thereafter, subject to removal by
and with the advice and consent of the Senate.

On Monday, March 2nd, 1867, the President returned the bill to
the Senate, in which house it had originated, with his objections
thereto, as follows:

To the Senate of the United States:

I have carefully examined the bill to regulate the tenure of
certain civil offices. The material portion of the bill is
contained in the first section, and is of the effect following,
namely:

"That every person holding any civil office to which he has been
appointed by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, and
every person who shall hereafter be appointed to any such office,
and shall become duly qualified to act therein, is and shall be
entitled to hold such office until a successor shall have been
appointed by the President, with the advice and consent of the
Senate, and duly qualified; and that the Secretaries of State, of
the Treasury, of War, of the Navy, and of the Interior, the
Postmaster General, and the Attorney General, shall hold their
offices respectively for and during the term of the President by
whom they may have been appointed, and for one month thereafter,
subject to removal by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate."

These revisions are qualified by a reservation in the fourth
section, "that nothing contained in the bill shall be construed
to extend the term of any office the duration of which is limited
by law." In effect the bill provides that the President shall not
remove from their places any of the civil officers whose terms of
service are not limited by law without the advice and consent of
the Senate of the United States. The bill, in this respect,
conflicts, in my judgment, with the Constitution of the United
States. The question, as Congress is well aware, is by no means a
new one. That the power of removal is constitutionally vested in
the President of the United States is a principle which has been
not more distinctly declared by judicial authority and judicial
commentators than it has been uniformly practiced upon by the
legislative and executive departments of the Government. The
question arose in the House of Representatives so early as the
16th day of June, 1789, on the bill for establishing an executive
department, denominated "The Department of Foreign Affairs." The
first clause of the bill, after recapitulating the functions of
that officer and defining his duties, had these words: "To be
removable from office by the President of the United States." It
was moved to strike out these words, and the motion was sustained
with great ability and vigor. It was insisted that the President
could not constitutionally exercise the power of removal
exclusive of the Senate; that the Federalist so interpreted the
Constitution when arguing for its adoption by the several States;
that the Constitution had nowhere given the President power of
removal, either expressly or by strong implication; but on the
contrary, had distinctly provided for removals from office by
impeachment only. A construction which denied the power of
removal by the President was further maintained by arguments
drawn from the danger of the abuse of the power; from the
supposed tendency of an exposure of public officers to capricious
removal; to impair the efficiency of the civil service; from the
alleged injustice and hardship of displacing incumbents,
dependent upon their official stations, without sufficient
consideration; from a supposed want of responsibility on the part
the President, and from an imagined defect of guarantees against
a vicious President, who might incline to abuse the power.

On the other hand, an exclusive power of removal by the President
was defended as a true exposition of the text of the
Constitution. It was maintained that there are certain causes for
which persons ought to be removed from office without being
guilty of treason, bribery, or malfeasance, and that the nature
of things demands that it should be so. "Suppose," it was said,
"a man becomes insane by the visitation of God, and is likely to
ruin our affairs; are the hands of Government to be confined
front warding off the evil? Suppose a person in office not
possessing the talents he was judged to have at the time of the
appointment, is the error not to be corrected; suppose he acquire
vicious habits and incurable indolence, or totally neglect the
duties of his office, which shall work mischief to the public
welfare, is there no way to arrest the threatened danger? Suppose
he become odious and unpopular by reason of the measures he
pursues, and this he may do without committing any positive
offense against the law, must he preserve his office in despite
of the popular will? Suppose him grasping for his own
aggrandizement and the elevation of his connections by every
means short of the treason defined by the Constitution, hurrying
your affairs to the precipice of destruction, endangering your
domestic tranquility, plundering you of the means of defense,
alienating the affections of your allies, and promoting the
spirit of discord, must the tardy, tedious, desultory road, by
way of impeachment, be traveled to overtake the man who, barely
confining himself within the letter of the law, is employed in
drawing off the vital principle of the Government?" The nature of
things, the great objects of society, the express objects of the
Constitution itself require that this thing should be otherwise.
To unite the Senate with the President "in the exercise of the
power" it was said, would involve us in the most serious
difficulty. "Suppose a discovery of any of these events should
take place when the Senate is not in session, how is the remedy
to be applied? The evil could be avoided in no other way than by
the Senate sitting always." In regard to the danger of the power
being abused if exercised by one man, it was said "that the
danger is as great with respect to the Senate, who are assembled
from various parts of the continent, with different impressions
and opinions;" that such a body is more likely to misuse the
power of removal than the man whom the united voice of America
calls to the presidential chair. As the nature of Government
requires the power of removal, it was maintained "that it should
be exercised in this way by the hand capable of exerting itself
with effect, and the power must be conferred on the President by
the Constitution as the executive officer of the Government." Mr.
Madison, whose adverse opinion in the Federalist had been relied
upon by those who denied the exclusive power, now participated in
the debate. He declared that he had reviewed his former opinions,
and he summed up the whole case as follows:

"The Constitution affirms that the executive power is vested in
the President. Are there exceptions to this proposition? Yes,
there are. The Constitution says that in appointing to office the
Senate shall be associated with the President, unless, in the
case of inferior officers, when the law shall otherwise direct.
Have we (that is, Congress) a right to extend this exception? I
believe not. If the Constitution has invested all executive power
in the President, I return to assert that the Legislature has no
right to diminish or modify his executive authority. The question
now resolves itself into this: is the power of displacing an
executive power? I conceive that if any power whatever is in the
Executive, it is in the power of appointing, overseeing, and
controlling those who execute the laws. If the Constitution had
not qualified the power of the President in appointing to office
by associating the Senate with him in that business, would it not
be clear that he would have the right by virtue of his executive
power to make such appointment? Should we be authorized, in
defiance of that clause in the Constitution--the executive power
shall be vested in the President--to unite the Senate with the
President in the appointment to office? I conceive not. It is
admitted that we should not be authorized to do this, I think it
may be disputed whether we have a right to associate there in
removing persons from office, the one power being as much of an
executive nature as the other; and the first is authorized by
being excepted out of the general rule established by the
Constitution in these words: 'The executive power shall be vested
in the President.'"

The question thus ably and exhaustively argued was decided by the
House of Representatives, by a vote of 34 to 20, in favor of the
principle that the executive power of removal is vested by the
Constitution in the Executive, and in the Senate by the casting
vote of the Vice President. The question has often been raised in
subsequent times of high excitement, and the practice of the
Government has nevertheless conformed in all cases to the
decision thus early made. * * * Chancellor Kent's remarks on the
subject are as follows:

"On the first organization of the Government it was made a
question whether the power of removal in case of officers
appointed to hold at pleasure resided nowhere but in the body
which appointed, and, of course, whether the consent of the
Senate was not requisite to remove. This was the construction
given to the Constitution while it was pending for ratification
before the State conventions by the author of the Federalist. But
the construction which was given to the Constitution by Congress,
after great consideration and discussion, was different. The
words of the act (establishing the Treasury Department) are: 'And
whenever the same shall be removed from office by the President
of the United States, or in any other case of vacancy in the
office, the assistant shall act.' This amounted to a legislative
construction of the Constitution, and it has ever since been
acquiesced in and acted upon as decisive authority in the case.
It applies equally to every other officer of the Government
appointed by the President, whose term of duration is not
specially declared. It is supported by the weighty reason that
the subordinate officers in the executive department ought to
hold at the pleasure of the head of the Department, because he is
invested generally with the executive authority, and the
participation in that authority by the Senate was an exception to
a general principle and ought to be taken strictly. The President
is the great responsible officer for the faithful execution of
the law, and the power of removal was incidental to that duty,
and might often be requisite to fulfill it."

Thus has the important question presented by this bill been
settled, in the language of the late Daniel Webster (who, while
dissenting from it, admitted that it was settled), by
construction, settled by precedent, settled by the practice of
the Government, and settled by statute.

The events of the last war furnished a practical confirmation of
the wisdom of the Constitution as it has hitherto been maintained
in many of its parts, including that which is now the subject of
consideration. When the war broke out rebel enemies, traitors,
abettors, and sympathizers were found in every department of the
Government, as well in the civil service as in the land and naval
military service. They were found in Congress and among the
keepers of the Capitol, in foreign missions, in each and all of
the Executive Departments, in the judicial service, in the Post
Office, and among the agents for conducting Indian affairs; and
upon probable suspicion they were promptly displaced by my
predecessor, so far as they held their offices under executive
authority, and their duties were confided to new and loyal
successors. No complaints against that power or doubts of its
wisdom, were entertained in any quarter.

Having at an early period accepted the Constitution in regard to
the executive office in the sense in which it was interpreted
with the concurrence of its founders, I have found no sufficient
grounds in the arguments now opposed to that construction or in
any assumed necessity of the times for changing those opinions.
For these reasons I return the bill to the Senate, in which House
it originated, for the further consideration of Congress, which
the Constitution prescribes. Insomuch as the several parts of the
bill which I have not considered are matters chiefly of detail,
and are based altogether upon the theory of the Constitution from
which I am obliged to dissent, I have not thought it necessary to
examine them with a view to make them an occasion of distinct and
special objections. Experience, I think, has shown that it is the
easiest, as it is also the most attractive, of studies to frame
constitutions for the self-government of free States and nations.

But I think experience has equally shown that it is the most
difficult of all political labors to preserve and maintain such
free constitutions of self government when once happily
established. I know no other way in which they can be preserved
and maintained except by a constant adherence to them through the
various vicissitudes of national existence, with such adaptations
as may become necessary, always to be effected, however, through
the agencies and in the forms prescribed in the original
constitutions themselves. Whenever administration fails or seems
to fail in securing any of the great ends for which Republican
Government is established, the proper course seems to be to renew
the original spirit and forms of the Constitution itself.

Andrew Johnson

The bill was promptly passed in both Houses over the President's
veto and became a law.

As pertinent and incident to the history of this controversy, is
the communication of the President notifying the Senate of the
suspension of Mr. Stanton, Aug. 12, 1867. The President said:

The Tenure-of-Office Act did not pass without notice. Like other
acts, it was sent to the President for approval. As is my custom
I submitted it to the consideration of my Cabinet for their
advice whether I should approve it or not. I was a grave question
of constitutional law, in which I would of course rely mostly
upon the opinion of the Attorney General, and of Mr. Stanton, who
had once been Attorney General. EVERY MEMBER OF MY CABINET
ADVISED ME THAT THE PROPOSED LAW WAS UNCONSTITUTIONAL. All spoke
without doubt or reservation; but MR. STANTON'S CONDEMNATION OF
THE LAW WAS THE MOST ELABORATE AND EMPHATIC. He referred to the
Constitutional provisions, the debates in Congress, especially to
the speech of Mr. Buchanan when a Senator, to the decisions of
the Supreme Court, and to the usage from the beginning of the
Government through every successive administration, all
concurring to establish the right of removal as vested in the
President. To all these he added the weight of his own deliberate
judgment, and advised me that it was my duty to defend the power
of the President from usurpation and veto the law.

During the recess of Congress in the Summer of 1867, the
President suspended Mr. Stanton from the War Office and appointed
Gen. Grant Secretary of War ad interim. Gen. Grant was then
understood as supporting the President in his controversy with
Mr. Stanton, and promptly accepted the appointment, holding it
until the following December, when the change was duly reported
to the Senate. The Senate refused to sanction Mr. Stanton's
suspension, and he consequently resumed his position of Secretary
of War and retained it until the close of the Impeachment
trial--the Senate then, in effect, by rejecting the Impeachment,
declaring that the President had the right to remove him.

Very naturally, after Mr. Stanton's restoration to the War Office
by the refusal of the Senate to sanction his suspension, the
relations between himself and the President were embittered and
many efforts were made by mutual friends to induce Mr. Stanton to
resign. Conspicuous among these were Gen. Grant, the General of
the Army, and Gen. Sherman, the next in rank, as shown in the
following note from Gen. Sherman to the President; but a few
weeks before the crisis came. It explains itself, as showing the
relations then subsisting between the parties mentioned:

332 K St., Washington, Jan, 18th.

I regretted, this morning, to say that I had agreed to go down to
Annapolis, to spend Monday with Admiral Porter. Gen. Grant has to
leave for Richmond on Monday morning at 6 o'clock. At a
conversation with the General, after an interview wherein I
offered to go with him on Monday morning to Mr. Stanton and say
it was our joint opinion that he should resign, it was found
impossible by reason of his going to Richmond and my going to
Annapolis. The General proposed this course. He will tell you
to-morrow and offer to go to Mr. Stanton to say that for the good
of the service of the country he ought to resign--this on Sunday.
On Monday, I will call on you, and if you think it necessary, I
will do the same--call on Mr. Stanton and tell him he should
resign. If he will not, then it will be time to consider ulterior
measures. In the meantime, it also happens that no necessity
exists for precipitating measures.

Yours truly, W. T. Sherman.

On Saturday, February 23, 1868, the day following the removal of
Mr. Stanton, Mr. Johnson sent to the Senate the name of Mr.
Thomas Ewing, senior, of Ohio, as his successor. The Senate had
adjourned for the day when the President's Secretary reached the
Capitol, between 12 and 1 o'clock, but the nomination was
formally communicated on the following Monday. Of this
nomination, Mr. Blaine has written, that "no name could have
given better assurance of good intentions and upright conduct
than that of Mr. Ewing. He was a man of lofty character, of great
eminence in his profession of the law, and with wide and varied
experience in public life. He had held high rank as a Senator in
the Augustan period of the Senate's learning and eloquence, and
he had been one of the ablest members of the distinguished
Cabinets organized by the only two Presidents elected by the Whig
Party. He had reached the ripe age of seventy-eight years, but
still in complete possession of all his splendid faculties. He
had voted for Mr. Lincoln at both elections, had been a warm
supporter of the contest for the Union, and was represented by
his own blood on many of the great battlefields of the war."

No notice was taken by the Senate of this nomination.

Here was offered an opportunity for the settlement of the dispute
over the War Office on fair and honorable terms to all parties
concerned. But that was not what the impeachers wanted. They
wanted to get Mr. Johnson out. They thought they had a pretext
that they could sustain by making it a party question, and did
not want a settlement on any other terms--so no attention was
given to Mr. Ewing's nomination. It was ignored and the
impeachment movement went on.



CHAPTER VI. IMPEACHMENT AGREED TO BY THE HOUSE.

Mr. Johnson's veto of the Tenure-of-Office Bill, and the passage
of that bill over his veto, of course intensified the antagonism
between himself and Congress. He not unnaturally regarded that
Act as an infringement of the Executive function which it was his
duty to his office and to himself to resent. The culmination came
upon his official notification to the Senate on February 21st,
1868, of his removal of Mr. Stanton from the office of Secretary
of War, and his appointment of Gen. Lorenzo Thomas as Secretary
ad interim, nothwithstanding the assumed interdiction of the
Tenure-of-Office Act.

Immediately on receipt of this notification, the Senate went into
executive session, and the following proceeding was had:

IN EXECUTIVE SESSION  Senate of the United States
February 21st, 1868

Whereas, The Senate have read and considered the communication of
the President, stating that he had removed Edwin M. Stanton,
Secretary of War, and had designated the Adjutant General of the
Army to act as Secretary of War ad interim. interim.. Therefore,

Resolved, by the Senate of the United States, That under the
Constitution and laws of the United States, the President has no
power to remove the Secretary of War and designate any other
officer to perform the duties of that office ad interim.

The journal of the Senate shows that this Resolution was adopted
by the following vote:

Yeas--Messrs. Cameron, Cattell, Cole, Conkling, Cragin, Drake,
Ferry, Harlan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton,
Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Ross, Sprague,
Stewart. Sumner. Thayer, Tipton, Trumbull. Van Winkle, Wade,
Willey Williams. Wilson. Yates--23.

Nays--Messrs. Buckalew, Davis, Doolittle, Edmunds, Hendricks,
Patterson of Tennessee--6.

Absent or not voting--20. Note. (Note--It is due to myself  to
say here, that the entry of my name in the above vote, was
incorrect. My distinct recollection is, that though present, I
declined to vote, and from the consideration mentioned. I was
totally unaware of my name being recorded as voting on the
proposition until long after I left the Senate, when of course
there was no opportunity to secure  a correction of the journal.)

This was an extraordinary proceeding. A proposition to impeach
the President had till recently been pending in the House for
nearly a year, and the ingenuity of the majority had been taxed
to the utmost to find some basis for an indictment upon which a
successful impeachment might be possible. There is ground for the
suggestion that much was hoped for in that direction from the
Tenure-of-Office Bill, at least so far as the House was
concerned. That hoped for opportunity had now come--nor is it an
unreasonable surmise, that this very extraordinary action of the
Senate was forced by outside as well as inside influences for the
purpose of testing the Senate, and committing it in advance and
in anticipation of the preferment of another impeachment by the
House.

As to the question of the guilt or innocence of the President of
the commission of an impeachable offense, this vote of the Senate
was in the nature of a vote of "guilty." It was therefore to a
degree an impeachment and conviction combined by the Senate,
prior to the bringing of an accusation by the House of
Representatives, the constitutional body for the preferment of an
impeachment of the President--and was an improper, and not far
removed from an indecent proceeding on the part of the Senate. In
effect, the President was thereby condemned by the Senate without
trial, and his later arraignment was simply to receive
sentence-it being solely upon the removal of Mr. Stanton that the
impeachment was brought by the House.

It is noticeable, and possibly indicative, that the names of
twenty out of fifty-four members of the Senate do not appear in
this list--a very unusual occurrence in divisions of that body;
especially in the exciting conditions that then prevailed. The
absentees, or at least abstentions from voting, were fifteen
Republicans and five Democrats, more than one-third of the body.
That very unusual absence or abstention from voting may well be
attributed to the very proper hesitancy of Senators to commit
themselves in advance, either way, on a proposition that was
reasonably certain to lead to an impeachment of the President,
then virtually pending and imminent in the House, and upon which
the Senate was equally certain to be called upon to act.

The action of the President was also communicated to the House of
Representatives by Mr. Stanton, at the same hour of the same day,
February 21st, 1868, in the following communication, enclosing a
copy of the President's notification of his dismissal.

War Department,
Washington City, Feb. 21, 1868.

Sir:--Gen. Thomas has just delivered to me a copy of the enclosed
order, which you will please communicate to the House of
Representatives.

(Signed) E. M. Stanton, Secretary of War.
Hon. Schuyler Colfax, Speaker House of Representatives.


This gave new life to the impeachment cause, which had a few
weeks before been defeated in the House and since then had, for
lack of material, been laming, to the discouragement of many of
its advocates: and the gleeful ejaculations, on the floor of the
House, in the lobbies, and on the streets, on receipt of this
news, and more especially after the action of the Senate became
known, which was not long in reaching the public, with a common
greeting slid clasping of hands: "Well, we've got him now!"

The communication of Mr. Stanton to the House of Representatives
was immediately, after reading, referred to the Committee on
Reconstruction.

In the evening of the same day, Mr. Covode, of Pennsylvania,
offered a resolution to impeach the President, which was also
referred to the same Committee.

On the next day, Feb. 22d, 1868, Mr. Stevens, Chairman of that
Committee, made the following report:

The Committee on Reconstruction, to whom was referred, on the
27th day of January last, the following resolution:

"Resolved, That the Committee on Reconstruction be authorized to
inquire what combinations have been made or attempted to be made
to obstruct the due execution of the laws; and to that end the
committee have power to send for persons and papers and to
examine witnesses oil oath, and report to this House what action.
if any, they may deem necessary; and that said committee bade
leave to report at any time."

And to whom was also referred, on the 21st day of February,
instant, a communication from Hon. Edwin M. Stanton, Secretary of
War, dated on said 21st day of February, together with a copy of
a letter from Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, to
the said Edwin M. Stanton, as follows:

Executive Mansion, Washington. D. C., Feb. 21, 1868.

Sir:-By virtue of the power and authority vested in me, as
President, by the Constitution and laws of the United States, you
are hereby removed from office as Secretary for the Department of
War, and your functions as such will terminate upon the receipt
of this communication.

You will transfer to Brevet Major General Lorenzo Thomas,
Adjutant General of the Army, who has this day been authorized
and empowered to act as Secretary of War ad interim, all records,
books, papers, and other public property now in your custody and
charge.

Respectfully yours. Andrew Johnson.
Hon. Edwin M. Stanton, Washington, D. C.


And to whom was also referred by the House of Representatives the
following resolution, namely:

"Resolved, That Andrew Johnson, President of the United States,
be impeached of high crimes and misdemeanors."

Have considered the several subjects referred to them, and submit
the following report:

That in addition to the papers referred to the committee, the
committee find that the President, on the 21st day of February,
1868, signed and issued a commission or letter of authority to
one Lorenzo Thomas, directing and authorizing said Thomas to act
as Secretary of War ad interim, and to take possession of the
books, records, and papers, and other public property in the War
Department, of which the following is a copy:

Executive Mansion,
Washington, Feb. 21, 1868.

Sir:--Hon. Edwin M. Stanton having been this day removed from
office as Secretary for the Department of War, you are hereby
authorized and empowered to act as Secretary of War ad interim,
and will immediately enter upon the discharge of the duties
pertaining to that office. Mr. Stanton has been instructed to
transfer to you all the records, books, papers, and other public
property now in his custody and charge.

Respectfully yours, Andrew Johnson.

To Brevet Major General Lorenzo Thomas, Adjutant General of the
United States Army. Washington, District of Columbia.

Official copy respectfully furnished to Hon. Edwin M. Stanton.

L. Thomas. Secretary of War ad interim.


Upon the evidence collected by the committee, which is herewith
presented, and in virtue of the powers with which they have been
invested by the House, they are of the opinion that Andrew
Johnson, President of the United States, be impeached of high
crimes and misdemeanors. They therefore recommend to the House
the adoption of the accompanying resolution.
Thaddeus Stevens, George S.Boutwell, John A. Bingham, C. T.
Hulburd, John F. Farnsworth, F. C. Beaman, H. E. Paine.


Resolution providing for the impeachment of Andrew Johnson,
President of the United States.

Resolved, That Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, be
impeached of high crimes and misdemeanors in office.

The following is a brief synopsisof the debate which ensued: Mr.
Stevens, of Pennsylvania. Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention in
the first instance to discuss this question; and if there be no
desire on the other side to discuss it we are willing that the
question should be taken upon the knowledge which the House
already has. Indeed, the fact of removing a man from office while
the Senate was in session without the consent of the Senate, if
there were nothing else, is of itself, and always has been
considered, a high crime and misdemeanor, and was never before p
racticed. But I will not discuss this question unless gentlemen
on the other side desire to discuss it. It they do, I shall for
the present give way to them and say what I have to say in
conclusion.

Mr. Brooke, (Dem. of N. Y.) Mr. Speaker, I had hoped to have an
opportunity, at least, to submit a minority report before we
entered upon this august proceeding of impeaching the chief
executive officer of this Government. Bat after a session of the
Committee on Reconstruction, hardly an hour in length, violating
an express rule of this House by sitting during the session-for
Rule 72 provides that no committee shall sit during the session
of the House without special leave-we have been summoned upon a
very partial submission of facts, without any comprehension, in
reality, of the charges which are made against the President of
they United States, upon a new indictment, in a new form once
more, and in a more alarming manner than ever, in this but a
partial Congress, representing but a section of a portion of the
people-in my judgment not representing the people of the United
States at allto act as a grand jury, with a large portion of that
grand jury excluded from the juryroom here; and suddenly,
impromptu perhaps, a vote is to be forced this very day-to
impeach the President of the United States!

I am utterly inadequate to discharge the duty which has devolved
upon me on this august day, the anniversary of the birthday of
the Father of his country. I am utterly unable upon this occasion
either to do my duty to the people or to express myself with that
deep solemnity which I feel in rising to resist this untoward,
this unholy, this unconstitutional proceeding. Indeed, I know not
why the ghost of impeachment hag appeared here in a new form. We
have attempted to lay it hitherto, and we have successfully laid
it. upon the floor of this House. But a minority of the party on
the other side, forcing its influence and its power upon a
majority of a committee of this House, has at last succeeded in
compelling its party to approach the House itself in a united,
and therefore in a more solemn form, and to demand the
impeachment of the President of the United States.

Sir, we have long been in the midst of a revolution. Long, long
has our country been agitated by the throes of that revolution.
But we are now approaching the last and the final stage of that
revolution in which, like many revolutions that have preceded it.
a legislative power not representing the people attempts to
depose the executive power, and thus to overthrow that
constitutional branch of the Government.

There is nothing new in all this. There is nothing new in what we
are doing, for men of the present but repeat the history of the
past. We are traversing over and over again the days of Cromwell
and Charles I and Charles II, and we are traversing over and over
again the scenes of the French revolution, baptized in blood in
our introductory part, but I trust in God never again to be
baptized by any revolutionary proceeding on the part of this
House.

I have not and never have been a defender of all the opinions of
General Jackson, but those on the other side who pretend to hold
him as authority and those on this side who have ever held him as
authority will find that in uttering the opinions which I have I
but reutter the opinions which he advanced in his veto of July
10, 1832, when he said:

"The Congress, the Executive, and the court must each for itself
be guided by its own opinion of the Constitution. Each public
officer who takes the oath to support the Constitution swears
that he will support it as he understands it, and not as it is
understood by others."

The President of the United States has given his opinion upon the
official tenure-of-office act and upon the Constitution of the
United States by the appointment of Adjutant General Thomas as
Secretary of War ad interim. and because of the exercise of that
Constitutional right we are called upon here at once to pronounce
him guilty of high crimes and misdemeanors and to demand his
deposition and degradation therefor. * * * * *

Mr. Spalding, (Rep. of Ohio). Mr. Speaker, I feel myself to be
in no proper frame of mind or heart to attempt rhetorical display
on this occasion. I can appreciate the sentiments of the
gentleman from New York [Mr. Brooks] when he says the question
before us is filled with solemnity; but when he attempts by
gasconade to deter members on this side of the House from the
conscientious discharge of their duty I say to my friend that he
has :.mistaken his calling." Sir, no more important duty could be
devolved upon this House of Representatives than that of
considering the question whether articles of impeachment shall be
preferred against the Chief Magistrate of the United States; and
for long months, ay, for more than a year, sir. I have resisted,
with all my efforts and all my personal influence, the approach
of that crisis which is now upon us and before us. The President
has clone many, very many, censurable acts: but I could not, on
my conscience. say that he should be holden to answer upon a
charge of "high crimes and misdemeanors" until something could be
made tangible whereby ha had brought himself in open conflict
with the Constitution and laws of the Union.

It has seemed to me, sir, for weeks, that this high officer of
our government was inviting the very ordeal which, I am sorry to
say, is now upon us, and the dread consequences of which will
speedily be upon him. He has thrown himself violently in contact
with an Act of Congress passed on the 2d day of March last by
the votes of the constitutional two-thirds of the Senate and
two-thirds of the House of Representatives over his veto
assigning his reasons for withholding his assent. Now, it matters
not how many acts can be found upon the statute books in years
gone by that would sanction the removal of a cabinet officer by
the President; the gentleman from New York numbers three. He may
reckon up thirty or three hundred and still if, within the last
six or nine months, Congress has, in a constitutional manner,
made an enactment that prohibits such removal, and the executive
wantonly disregards such enactment and attempts to remove the
officer, he incurs the penalty as clearly and as certainly as if
there never had been any legislation to the contrary. That
subsequent enactment, if it be constitutional, repeals, by its
own force, all other prior enactments with which it may conflict;
and in nothing is that enactment more significant than in this,
that the President shall not remove any civil officer, who has
been appointed by and with the advice and consent of the Senate,
without the concurrence of that body, when it is itself in
session.

Mr. Bingham, (Rep.) of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, all right-minded men
must concede that the question under consideration is one of
supreme moment to till the people of the Republic. I protest for
myself, sir, that I am utterly incapable of approaching the
discussion of this question in the spirit of a partisan. I repel,
sir, the intimation of the gentleman from New York, Mr. Brooks,
that I am careless of the obligation of my oath or unconcerned
about the supremacy of the Constitution and the laws. I look upon
the Constitution of the country as the very breath of the
nation's life. I invoke this day upon the consideration of this
great question the matchless name of Washington, as did the
gentleman, and ask him, in the consideration of the matter now
before us, to ponder upon those deathless words of the Father of
our Country, wherein he declares that "the Constitution which at
any time exists, till changed by an explicit and authentic act of
the whole people, is sacredly obligatory upon all"--upon all sir,
from the President to the humblest citizen--standing within the
jurisdiction of the Republic. Washington but echoed the words
that himself and his associates had imbedded in the text of the
Constitution, that "this Constitution and the laws passed in
pursuance thereof shall be the supreme law of the land." It shall
be supreme over every officer; it shall be supreme over every
State; it shall be supreme over every territory; it shall be
supreme upon every deck covered by your flag in every zone all
round the globe. Every man within its jurisdiction, official and
unofficial, must bow to the supremacy of the Constitution.

The gentleman says that the issue involved is an issue about an
office. I beg the gentleman's pardon. The issue involved is
whether the supremacy of the Constitution shall be maintained by
the people's Representatives. The President of the United States
has assumed, sir, to set himself above the Constitution and the
laws. He has assumed to defy the law, he has assumed to challenge
the people's Representatives to sit in judgment upon his
malfeasance in office. Every man who has considered it worth
while to observe my conduct touching this question that has so
long agitated this House and agitated this country may have
discovered that I have kept myself back and have endeavored to
keep others back from making any unnecessary issue between the
President and Representatives of the people touching the manner
in which he discharged the duties of his great office. I had no
desire, sir, to have resort unnecessarily to this highest power
reposed by the people in their Representatives and their Senators
for the vindication of their own violated Constitution and
violated laws. Notwithstanding there was much in the conduct of
the President to endanger the peace and repose of the country,
yet, so long as there was any doubt upon the question of his
liability to impeachment within the text and spirit of the
Constitution, I was unwilling to utter one syllable to favor such
a proposition or to record a vote to advance it. * * *

Mr. Beck, (Dem. of Ky.) The single question upon which the
decision of this House is now to be made is that the President
has attempted to test the constitutionality of a law which he
believes to be unconstitutional. All the testimony heretofore
presented upon which to base an impeachment of the President was
decided by even a majority of the Republican members of this
House to be insufficient to justify impeachment. All questions
growing out of the combinations and conspiracies lately charged
upon the President were ruled by the Reconstruction Committee to
be insufficient, and were not brought before this House. And
the sole question now before us is, is there anything in this
last act of the President removing Mr. Stanton and appointing
Adjutant General Thomas Secretary of War ad interim to justify
his impeachment by this House?

I maintain that the President of the United States is in duty
bound to test the legality of every law which he thinks
interferes with his rights and powers as the Chief Magistrate of
this nation. Whenever he has powers conferred upon him by the
Constitution of the United States, and an act of Congress
undertakes to deprive him of those powers, or any of them. he
would be false to his trust as the Chief Executive of this
nation, false to the interests of the people whom he represents,
if he did not by every means in his power seek to test the
constitutionality of that law, and to take whatever steps were
necessary and proper to have it tested by the highest tribunal in
the land, and to ascertain whether he has a right under the
Constitution to do what he claims the right to do, or whether
Congress has the right to deprive him of the powers which he
claims have been vested in him by the Constitution of the United
States, and that is all that he proposes to do in this case. * *
*

Mr. Logan, (Rep. of Ills.) Now, Mr. Speaker, let us examine this
question for a moment. It seems to me very plain and easy of
solution. It is not necessary, in order to decide whether this
action of the President of the United States comes within the
purview and meaning of this statute, for us to talk about
revolutions or what this man or that man has said or decided.
What has been the act of the President is the question. The law
is plain. If the President shall appoint or shall give a letter
of authority or issue a commission to any person, without the
consent of the Senate, he is guilty of--what? The law says of a
high misdemeanor. And, under and by virtue of the Constitution,
the President can be impeached--for what? For high crimes or
misdemeanors. This law declares the issuing a commission to, or
giving a letter of authority to, or appointing to or removing
from office, any person. without the advice and consent of the
Senate of the United States, shall be a high misdemeanor, which
is within the meaning and within the pale of the Constitution of
the United States.

Now, what is the evidence presented to this body by one of its
committees? It is of this character: The Secretary of War, Edwin
M. Stanton, has been declared by a solemn vote of the Senate to
be the Secretary of War, by virtue of--what? By virtue of an
appointment to that office; by reason of the fact that Andrew
Johnson did not relieve him from office when he had the right to
present the name of somebody else--soon after his taking the
presidential chair--not the right to turn him out, but the right
to nominate some one else to the senate and ask them to confirm
him to that office. That the President failed to do. Then, acting
under the provisions of this statute, the President suspended Mr.
Stanton as Secretary of War, but the Senate passed upon that act,
and decided that the reasons given by the President for
suspending Mr. Stanton were not satisfactory; and accordingly, by
virtue of this law, Mr. Stanton was confirmed and reinstated in
his position as Secretary of War.

Now, all this having been done, it cannot certainly be claimed
that the President, in his recent course in regard to Mr.
Stanton, has acted without any intention of violating the law.
Nor can it be claimed that the President is ignorant of the law.
* * *

Mr. Holman (Dem., Ind.) We have listened to much excited
eloquence upon this question. It is too manifest that Congress,
moving on with that impetus which is ever the result of excessive
political power. seeks to usurp those powers which are by the
Constitution vested in the other Departments of the Government. I
do not propose to discuss this subject or answer the speech of
the gentleman from Illinois [Mr. Logan] with any words of my own.
I have before me a paper which is full of mature wisdom and
patriotic counsel, a speech that comes from the solemn past, yet
speaks to every heart that beats for the Union of these States,
and the prosperity of the American people; a voice that is
answered back from every battlefield of the Revolution, and from
the grave of every soldier who has fallen in defense of American
liberty. I ask that this speech may be read to the House, as
appropriate to this day, the 22nd of February, a day once so
venerated. I ask that this immortal address to the American
people, a speech that needs no revision: a speech in which there
can be no interruptions made in this moment of passion, be read
to the American Congress, for I can well afford to be silent
while that great voice speaks to the Representatives of the
people of this Republic.

The Clerk commenced the reading of Washington's Farewell Address.

Mr. Peters: I rise to a question of order. I insist that that
address is not germane to the question before the House.

Mr. Holman: I insist that it is exceedingly germane.

Mr. Lawrence, of Ohio: Allow me to suggest that it is germane,
for the reason that it relates to retirement from office.
[Laughter.]

Mr. Peters: That is too remote.

The Speaker pro tempore, (Mr. Blaine, in the chair.) The Chair
sustains the point of order.

Mr. Holman: I hope no gentleman will object to the completion of
the reading: it will only occupy the time I am entitled to.

Mr. Peters: It is doubtless very instructive, and so would a
chapter of the Bible be. but it has nothing to do with the
question before the House, and I insist upon the point of order.

The Speaker pro tempore. Up to this point the discussion has
been pertinent and germane to the question--very closely so--and
the Chair is compelled to rule, the question of order being
raised, that this is not germane or in order. The gentleman from
Indiana will proceed in order.

Mr. Holman: I suppose, Mr. Speaker, the Constitution of the
United States would scarcely be in order. I will not ask to have
it read.

The debate continued in the vein illustrated in the foregoing
extracts, from the morning of February 22, notwithstanding it was
a National Holiday, such was the haste of the impeachers, to the
evening of the 24th, almost without interruption. It was at times
illustrated by marked ability, and on the Republican side by
intense bitterness and partisan malignity. A large number of the
members of the House participated in the debate.

Mr. Thaddeus Stevens then closed the debate in the following
arraignment of the President:

Now in defiance of this law. (the Office-Tenure Act) Andrew
Johnson, on the 21st day of February, 1868, issued his commission
or letter of authority to one Lorenzo Thomas, appointing him
Secretary of War ad interim, and commanded him to take possession
of the Department of War and to eject the incumbent. E M.
Stanton, then in lawful possession of said office. Here, if this
act stood alone, would be an undeniable official misdemeanor--
not only a misdemeanor per se, but declared to be so by the act
itself, and the party made indictable and punishable in a
criminal proceeding. If Andrew Johnson escapes with bare removal
from office, if he be not FINED AND INCARCERATED IN THE
PENITENTIARY AFTERWARD UNDER CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS, he may thank
the weakness or the clemency of Congress and not his own
innocence.

We shall propose to prove on the trial that Andrew Johnson was
guilty of misprision of bribery by offering to General Grant, if
he would unite with him in his lawless violence, to assume in his
stead the penalties and to endure the imprisonment denounced by
the law Bribery is one of the offenses specifically enumerated
for which the President may be impeached and removed from office.
By the Constitution, article two, section two, the President has
power to nominate and, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate, to appoint all officers of the United States whose
appointments are not therein otherwise provided for and which
shall be established by law, and to fill up all vacancies that
may happen during the recess of the Senate, by granting
commissions which shall expire at the end of their nest session.
Nowhere, either in the Constitution or by statute, has the
President power to create a vacancy during the session of the
Senate and fill it without the advice and consent of the Senate,
and yet, on the 21st day of February, 1868, while the Senate was
in session, he notified the head of the War Department that he
was removed from office and his successor ad interim appointed.
Here is a plain, recorded violation of the Constitution and laws,
which, if it stood alone, would make every honest and intelligent
man give his vote for impeachment. The President had persevered
in his lawless course through along series of unjustifiable acts.
When the so called Confederate States of America were conquered
and had laid down their arms and surrendered their territory to
the victorious Union the government and final disposition of the
conquered country BELONGED TO CONGRESS ALONE, according to every
principle of the law of nations.

Neither the Executive nor the judiciary had any right to
interfere with it except so far as was necessary to control it by
military rule until the SOVEREIGN POWER OF THE NATION had
provided for its civil administration. No power but Congress had
any right to say WHETHER EVER OR WHEN they should be admitted to
the Union as States and entitled to the privileges of the
Constitution of the United States. And yet Andrew Johnson, with
unblushing hardihood, undertook to rule them by his own power
alone; to lead them into full communion with the Union: direct
them what governments to erect and what constitutions to adopt,
and to send Representatives and Senators to Congress according to
his instructions. When admonished by express act of Congress,
more than once repeated, he disregarded the warning and continued
his lawless usurpation. He is since known to have obstructed the
re-establishment of those governments by the authority of
Congress, and has advised the inhabitants to resist the
legislation of Congress. In my judgment his conduct with regard
to that transaction was a high-handed usurpation of power which
ought long ago to have brought him to impeachment and trial and
to have removed him from his position of great mischief.

I trust that when we come to vote upon this question we shall
remember that although it is the duty of the President to see
that the laws be executed, THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF THE NATION
RESTS IN CONGRESS, who have been placed around the executive as
muniments to defend his rights, and as watchmen to enforce his
obedience to the law and the Constitution. His oath to obey the
Constitution and our duty to compel him to do it are a tremendous
obligation, heavier than was ever assumed by mortal rulers. We
are to protect or to destroy the liberty and happiness of a
mighty people. and to take care that they progress in
civilization and defend themselves against every kind of tyranny.
As we deal with the first great political malefactor so will be
the result of our efforts to perpetuate the happiness and good
government of the human race. The God of our fathers, who
inspired them with the thought of universal freedom, will hold us
responsible for the noble institutions which they projected and
expected us to carry out.

The Clerk then read the Resolution and the House proceeded to
vote, as follows:

Resolution providing for the impeachment of Andrew Johnson,
President of the United States:

Resolved, That Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, be
impeached of high crimes and misdemeanors in office.

Yeas--Messrs. Allison, Ames, Anderson, Arnell, Delos R. Ashley,
James M. Ashley, Bailey, Baker, Baldwin, Banks, Beaman, Beatty,
Benton, Bingham, Blaine, Blair, Boutwell, Bromwell, Broomall.
Buckland, Butler, Cake, Churchill, Reader W. Clarke, Sidney
Clarke, Cobb, Coburn, Cook, Cornell, Covode, Cullom, Dawes,
Dodge, Driggs, Eckley, Eggleston, Eliot, Farnsworth, Ferries.
Ferry, Fields, Gravely, Griswold, Halsy, Harding, Higby, Hill,
Hooper, Hopkins, Asahel W. Hubbard, Chester D. Hubbard, Hulburd,
Hunter, Ingersoll, Jenckes, Judd, Julian, Kelley, Kelsey,
Ketcham, Kitchen Laflin, George V. Lawrence, William Lawrence,
Lincoln, Loan, Logan, Loughridge, Lynch, Mallory, Marvin,
McCarthy, McClurg, Mercur, Miller, Moore, Moorhead, Morrell,
Mullins, Myers, Newcomb, Nunn, O'Neill, Orth, Paine, Perham,
Peters, Pike, Pile, Plants, Poland, Polsley, Price, Raum,
Robertson, Sawyer, Schenck, Scofield, Selye, Shanks, Smith,
Spalding, Starkweather, Aaron F. Stevens, Thaddeus Stevens,
Stokes, Taffe, Taylor, Trowbridge, Twitchell, Upson, Van Aernam.
Burt Van Horn, Van Wyck, Ward, Cadwalader C. Washburn, Elihu B.
Washburn, Williams, Washburn, Welker, Thomas Williams, James F.
Wilson, John T. Wilson, Stephen F. Wilson, Windom, Woodbridge and
the Speaker--126.

Nays--Messrs. Adams, Archer, Axtell, Barnes, Barnum, Beck, Boyer,
Brooks, Burr, Cary, Chanler, Eldridge, Fox, Getz, Glossbrenner,
Galladay, Grover, Haight, Holman, Hotchkiss, Richard D. Hubbard,
Morrissey, Mungen, Niblack, Nicholson, Phelps, Pruyn, Randall,
Ross, Sitgreaves, Stewart, Stone, Taber, Lawrence S. Trimble, Van
Auken, Van Trump, Wood and Woodward--47.

On motion of Mr. Stevens the following resolutions were adopted:

Resolved, That a committee of two be appointed to go to the
Senate and, at the bar thereof, in the name of the House of
Representatives and of all the people of the United States, to
impeach Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, of high
crimes and misdemeanors in office, and acquaint the Senate that
the House of Representatives will, in due time, exhibit
particular articles of impeachment against him and make good the
same; and that the committee do demand that the Senate take order
for the appearance of said Andrew Johnson to answer to said
impeachment.

Resolved, That a committee of seven be appointed to prepare and
report articles of impeachment against Andrew Johnson, President
of the United States, with power to send for persons, papers and
records, and to take testimony under oath.

The Speaker announced the following committee under these
resolutions:

Committee to Communicate to the Senate to the Senate the action
of the House ordering AN IMPEACHMENT of the of the President
of the United States.---Thaddeus Stevens, of Pennsylvania, and
John A. Bingham, of Ohio.

Committee to declare articles of Articles of Impeachment against
the President of the United States.--George S. Boutwell of
Massachusetts; Thaddeus Stevens, of Pennsylvania; John A.
Bingham, of Ohio; James F. Wilson, of Iowa; John A. Logan, of
Illinois; George W. Julian, of Indiana, and Hamilton Ward, of New
York.



CHAPTER VII. IMPEACHMENT REPORTED TO THE SENATE.

THE PRESIDENT'S ANSWER.

On February 25th, 1868, Messrs. Stevens and Bingham, a committee
of the House, appeared at the bar of the Senate, and Mr. Stevens
said:

Mr. President, in obedience to the order of the House of
Representatives, we appear before you, and in the name of the
House of Representatives and of all the people of the United
States, we do impeach Andrew Johnson, President of the United
States, of high crimes and misdemeanors in office; and we further
inform the Senate that the House of Representatives will in due
time exhibit particular articles of impeachment against hint and
make good the same; and in their name we demand that the Senate
take order for the appearance of said Andrew Johnson to answer
said impeachment.

The committee retired, and after debate the following resolution
was adopted by the Senate:

Resolved, That the Message of the House of Representatives
relating to the impeachment of Andrew Johnson. President of the
United States, be referred to a select committee of seven, to
consider and report thereon.

On the 26th, Mr. Howard, from the select committee appointed to
consider and report upon the Message of the House of
Representatives in relation to the impeachment of Andrew Johnson,
President of the United States, reported the following
resolution:

Whereas, the House of Representatives. on the 25th day of the
present month, by two of their members, Messrs. Thaddeus Stevens
and John A. Bingham, at the bar of the Senate, impeached Andrew
Johnson, President of the United States. of high crimes and
misdemeanors in office, and informed the Senate that the House of
Representatives will in due time exhibit particular articles of
impeachment against him and make good the same; and likewise
demanded that the Senate take order for the appearance of said
Andrew Johnson, to answer to the said impeachment: Therefore,

Resolved, That the Senate will take proper order thereon, of
which due notice shall be given to the House of Representatives.

On the 28th, Mr. Howard, of the Select Committee appointed to
prepare rules for the government of trials of impeachment,
reported a series of rules, which were adopted by the Senate on
March 2nd, after a three days debate.

On the same day, the following gentlemen were elected by the
House of Representatives as Managers to conduct the prosecution
of the impeachment of the President before the Senate

Hons. Jno. A. Bingham, of Ohio; George S. Boutwell, of
Massachusetts; James F. Wilson, of Iowa; Benj. F. Butler, of
Massachusetts; John A. Logan, of Illinois; Thomas Wilson, of
Pennsylvania, and Thaddeus Stevens, of Pennsylvania.

On March 3rd it was ordered by the Senate:

That the Secretary of the Senate inform the House of
Representatives that the Senate is ready to receive the managers
appointed by the House of Representatives to carry to the Senate
articles of impeachment against Andrew Johnson, President of the
United States.

In the Senate, on the 4th, the following formal proceedings were
had:

The managers of the impeachment on the part of the House of
Representatives appeared at the bar, and their presence was
announced by the Sergeant-at-Arms.

The President pro tempore: The managers of the impeachment will
advance within the bar and take the seats provided for them.

The managers came within the bar and took the seats assigned to
them in the area in front of the Vice President's Chair.

The Speaker of the House of Representatives advanced and took a
seat on the right of the President pro tempore of the Senate.

Mr. Manager Bingham:

Mr. President, the managers on the part of the House of
Representatives, by order of the House, are ready at the bar of
the Senate, whenever it may please the Senate to hear them, to
present articles of impeachment and in maintenance of the
impeachment preferred against Andrew Johnson, President of the
United States, by the House of Representatives.

The President pro tempore:

The Sergeant-at-arms will make proclamation.

The Sergeant-at-arms:

Hear ye! Hear ye! All persons are commanded to keep silence, on
pain of imprisonment, while the House of Representatives is
exhibiting to the Senate of the United States, articles of
impeachment against Andrew Johnson, President of the United
States.

The managers then rose and remained standing, with the exception
of Mr. Stevens, who was too feeble to do so, while Mr. Manager
Bingham read the articles of impeachment, as follows:

Articles exhibited by the. House of Representatives of the United
States. in the name of themselves and all the people of the
United States, against Andrew Johnson, President of the United
States, in maintenance and support of their impeachment against
him for high crimes and misdemeanors in ofce.

ARTICLE I.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, on the
21st day of February, in the year of our Lord eighteen hundred
and sixty-eight, at Washington, in the District of Columbia,
unmindful of the high duties of his office, of his oath of
office, and of the requirement of the Constitution that he should
take care that the laws be faithfully executed, did unlawfully,
and in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United
States issue an order in writing for the removal of Edwin M.
Stanton from the office of Secretary for the Department of War,
said Edwin M. Stanton having been theretofore duly appointed and
commissioned by and with the advice and consent of the Senate of
the United States, as such secretary, and said Andrew Johnson,
President of the United States, on the twelfth day of August in
the year of our Lord eighteen hundred and sixty-seven, and during
the recess of said Senate, having suspended by his order Edwin M.
Stanton from said office, and within twenty days after the first
day of the next meeting of said Senate, that is to say, on the
twelfth day of December in the year last aforesaid having
reported to said Senate such suspension with the evidence and
reasons for his action in the case and the name of the person
designated to perform the duties of such office temporarily until
the next meeting of the Senate, and said Senate thereafterwards,
on the thirteenth day of January, in the year of our Lord
eighteen hundred and sixty-eight, having duly considered the
evidence and reasons reported by said Andrew Johnson for said
suspension, and having refused to concur in said suspension,
whereby and by force of the provisions of an act entitled "An Act
regulating the tenure of certain civil offices," passed March
second, eighteen hundred and sixty-seven, said Edwin M. Stanton
did forthwith resume the functions of his office, whereof the
said Andrew Johnson had then and there due notice, and said Edwin
M. Stanton, by reason of the premises, on said 21st day of
February, being lawfully entitled to hold said office of
Secretary for the Department of War, which said order for the
removal of said Edwin M. Stanton is in substance as follows, that
is to say:

Executive Mansion,
Washington, D. C., Feb. 21, 1868.

Sir:--By virtue of the power and authority vested in me as
President by the Constitution and laws of the United States you
are hereby removed from office as Secretary for the Department of
War, and your functions as such will terminate upon the receipt
of this communication.

You will transfer to Brevet Major General Lorenzo Thomas,
Adjutant General of the army, who has this day been authorized
and empowered to act as Secretary of War ad interim, all records.
books, papers, and other public property now in your custody and
charge.

Respectfully yours,
Andrew Johnson.
To the Hon. Edwin M. Stanton, Washington, D. C.

Which order was unlawfully issued with intent then and there to
violate the act entitled "An Act regulating the tenure of certain
civil offices," passed March 2d, 1867, and with the further
intent contrary to the provisions of said act, in violation
thereof, and contrary to the provisions of the Constitution of
the United States, and without the advice and consent of the
Senate of the United States, the said Senate then and there being
in session, to remove said Edwin M. Stanton from the office of
Secretary for the Department of War, the said. Edwin M. Stanton
being then and there Secretary for the Department of War, and
being then and there in the due and lawful execution and
discharge of the duties of said office, whereby said Andrew
Johnson. President of the United States, did then and there
commit and was guilty of a high misdemeanor in office.

ARTICLE II.

That on the said twenty-first of February, in the year of our
Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight, at Washington,
in the District of Columbia, said Andrew Johnson, President of
the United States, unmindful of the high duties of his office, of
his oath of office, and in violation of the Constitution of the
United States, and contrary to the provisions of an act entitled
"An act regulating the tenure of certain civil offices," passed
March second, eighteen hundred and sixty-seven, without the
advice and consent of the Senate of the United States, said
Senate then and there being in session, and without authority of
law, did, with intent to violate the Constitution of the United
States, and the act aforesaid, issue and deliver to one Lorenzo
Thomas a letter of authority in substance as follows, that is to
say:

Executive Mansion.
Washington, D. C., February 21, 1868.

Sir:--The Hon. Edwin M. Stanton having been this day removed from
office as Secretary for the Department of War, you are hereby
authorized and empowered to act as Secretary of War ad interim,
and will immediately enter upon the discharge of the duties
pertaining to that office.

Mr. Stanton has been instructed to transfer to you all the
records, books, papers, and other public property now in his
custody and charge.

Respectfully yours, Andrew Johnson.
To Brevet Major General Lorenzo Thomas. Adjutant General U. S.
Army, Washington, D. C.

Then and there being no vacancy in said offce of Secretary for
the Department of War, whereby said Andrew Johnson. President of
the United States, did then and there commit and was guilty of a
high misdemeanor in office.

ARTICLE III.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, on the
twenty-first day of February, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight, at Washington, in the
District of Columbia, did commit and was guilty of a high
misdemeanor in office in this, that, without authority of law,
while the Senate of the United States was then and there in
session, he did appoint one Lorenzo Thomas to be Secretary for
the Department of War ad interim, without the advice and consent
of the Senate, and with intent to violate the Constitution of the
United States, and no vacancy having happened in said office of
Secretary for the Department of War during the recess of the
Senate, and no vacancy existing in said office at the time, and
which said appointment, so made by said Andrew Johnson, of said
Lorenzo Thomas, is in substance as follows, that is to say:

Executive Mansion, Washington, D. C., Feb. 21, 1868.
Sir:--The Hon. Edwin M. Stanton having been this day removed from
office as Secretary for the Department of War, you are hereby
authorized and empowered to act as Secretary of War ad interim,
and will immediately enter upon the discharge of the duties
pertaining to that office.

Mr. Stanton, has been instructed to transfer to you all the
records. books, papers, and other public property now in his
custody and charge.

Respectfully yours, Andrew Johnson.
To Brevet Major General Lorenzo Thomas, Adjutant General, U. S.
Army, Washington, D. C

ARTICLE IV.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States,
unmindful of the high duties of his office and of his oath of
office, in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United
States, on the twenty-first day of February, in the year of our
Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight, at Washington,
in the District of Columbia, did unlawfully conspire with one
Lorenzo Thomas, and with other persons to the House of
Representatives unknown, with intent, by intimidation and
threats, unlawfully to hinder and prevent Edwin M. Stanton, then
and there the Secretary for the Department of War, duly appointed
under the laws of the United Stales, from holding said office of
Secretary for the Department of War, contrary to and in violation
of the Constitution of the United States, and of the provisions
of an act entitled "An act to define and punish certain
conspiracies," approved July thirty-first, eighteen hundred and
sixty-one, whereby said Andrew Johnson, President of the United
States, did then and there commit and was guilty of a high crime
in office.

ARTICLE V.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States,
unmindful of the high duties of his office and of his oath of
office. on the twenty-first day of February, in the year of our
Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight, and on divers
other days and times in said year, before the second day of
March, in the year, of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-eight, at Washington, in the District of Columbia, did
unlawfully conspire with one Lorenzo Thomas, and with other
persons to the House of Representatives unknown, to prevent and
hinder the execution of an act entitled "An act regulating the
tenure of certain civil offces," passed March second, eighteen
hundred and sixty-seven, and in pursuance of said conspiracy, did
unlawfully attempt to prevent Edwin M. Stanton, then and there
being Secretary for the Department of War, duly appointed and
commissioned under the laws of the United States, from holding
said office, whereby the said Andrew Johnson, President of the
Unite States, did then and there commit and was guilty of a high
misdemeanor in office.

ARTICLE VI.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States,
unmindful of the high duties of his office and of his oath of
office, on the twenty-first day of February, in the year of our
Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight, at Washington,
in the District of Columbia, did unlawfully conspire with one
Lorenzo Thomas by force to seize, take and possess the property
of the United States in the Department of War, and then and there
in the custody and charge of Edwin M. Stanton, Secretary for
said Department, contrary to the provisions of an act entitled
"An act to define and punish certain conspiracies," approved July
thirty-one, eighteen hundred and sixty one, and with intent to
violate and disregard an act entitled "An act regulating the
tenure of certain civil offices," passed March second, eighteen
hundred and sixty-seven, whereby said Andrew Johnson, President
of the United States, did then and there commit a high crime in
office.

ARTICLE VII.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States,
unmindful of the high duties of his office and of his oath of
office, on the twenty-first day of February, in the year of our
Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight, at Washington.
in the District of Columbia, did unlawfully conspire with one
Lorenzo Thomas with intent unlawfully to seize, take, and possess
the property of the United States in the Department of War, in
the custody and charge of Edwin M. Stanton Secretary for said
Department, with intent to violate and disregard the act entitled
"An act regulating the tenure of certain civil offices" passed
March second, eighteen hundred and sixty-seven, whereby said
Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, did then and
there commit a high misdemeanor in office.

ARTICLE VIII.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States,
unmindful of the high duties of his office and of his oath of
office, with intent unlawfully to control the disbursements of
the moneys appropriated for the military service and for the
Department of War, on the twenty-first day of February, in the
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight, at
Washington, in the District of Columbia, did unlawfully and
contrary to the provisions of an act entitled "An act regulating
the tenure of certain civil offices," passed March second,
eighteen hundred and sixty-seven, and in violation of the
Constitution of the United States, and without the advice and
consent of the Senate of the United States, and while the Senate
was then and there in session, there being no vacancy in the
office of Secretary for the Department of War, and with intent to
violate and disregard the act aforesaid, then and there issue and
deliver to one Lorenzo Thomas a letter of authority in writing,
in substance as follows, that is to say:

Executive Mansion, Washington, D. C., Feb. 21, 1868.

Sir:--The Hon. Edwin M. Stanton having been this day removed from
office as Secretary for the Department of War, you are hereby
authorized and empowered to act as Secretary of War ad interim,
and will immediately enter upon the discharge of the duties
pertaining to that office.

Mr. Stanton has been instructed to transfer to you all the
records, books, papers, and other public property now in his
custody and charge.

Respectfully yours, Andrew Johnson.
To Brevet Major General Lorenzo Thomas, Adjutant General, United
States Army, Washington, D. C.

Whereby said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, did
then and there commit and was guilty of a high misdemeanor in
office.

ARTICLE IX.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States. on the
twenty-second day of February, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight, at Washington, in the
District of Columbia. in disregard of the Constitution, and the
laws of the United States duly enacted, as commander-in-chief of
the army of the United States, dial bring before himself then and
there William H. Emory, a major-general by brevet in the army of
the United States, actually in command of the department of
Washington and the military forces thereof, and did then and
there, as such commander-in-chief, declare to and instruct said
Emory that part of a law of the United states, passed March
second, eighteen hundred and sixty-seven entitled "An act making
appropriations for the support of the army for the year ending
June thirtieth, eighteen hundred and sixty-eight and for other
purposes," especially the second section thereof, which provides,
among other things, that "all orders and instructions relating to
military operations. issued by the President or Secretary of War,
shall be issued through the General of the army, and, in case of
his inability, through the next in rank," was unconstitutional,
and in contravention of the commission of said Emory, and which
said provision of law had been theretofore duly and legally
promulgated by General Orders for the government and direction of
the army of the United States, as the said Andrew Johnson then
and there well knew. with intent thereby to induce said Emory, in
his official capacity as commander of the department of
Washington, to violate the provisions of said act, and to take
and receive, act upon, and obey such orders as he, the said
Andrew Johnson, might make and give, and which should not be
issued through the General of the army of the United States,
according to the provisions of said act, and with the further
intent thereby to enable him, the said Andrew Johnson, to prevent
the execution of the act entitled "An act regulating the tenure
of certain civil offices," passed March second eighteen hundred
and sixty-seven and to unlawfully prevent Edwin M. Stanton then
being Secretary for the Department of War, from holding said
office and discharging the duties thereof, whereby said Andrew
Johnson, President of the United States, did then and there
commit and was guilty of a high misdemeanor in office.

And the House of Representatives by protestation saving to
themselves the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter any
further articles, or other accusation or impeachment against the
said Andrew Johnson, President or the United States, and also of
replying to his answers which he shall wake unto the articles
herein preferred against him, and of offering proof to the same,
and every part thereof, and to all and every other article,
accusation, or impeachment which shall be exhibited by them, as
the case shall require, do demand that the said Andrew Johnson
may be put to answer the high crimes and misdemeanors in office
herein charged against him, and that such proceedings,
examinations, trials, and judgments may be thereupon had and
given as may be agreeable to law and justice

ARTICLE X.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States,
unmindful of the high duties of his office, and the dignity and
proprieties thereof, and of the harmony and courtesies which
ought to exist and be maintained between the executive and
legislative branches of the government of the United States,
designing and intending to set aside the rightful authority and
powers of Congress, did attempt to bring into disgrace, ridicule,
hatred, contempt and reproach, the Congress of the United States,
and the several branches thereof, to impair and destroy the
regard and respect of all the good people of the United States
for the Congress and legislative powers thereof, (which all
officers of the government ought inviolably to preserve and
maintain.) and to excite the odium and resentment of all the good
people of the United States against Congress and the laws by it
duly and constitutionally enacted; and in pursuance of his said
design and intent, openly and publicly, and before divers
assemblages of the citizens of the United States, convened in
divers parts thereof to meet and receive said Andrew Johnson as
the Chief Magistrate of the United States, did, on the eighteenth
day of August, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred
and sixty-six, and on divers other days and times, as well before
as afterward, make and deliver, with a loud voice, certain
intemperate, inflammatory, and scandalous harangues, and did
therein utter loud threats and bitter menaces. as well against
Congress as the laws of the United States duly enacted thereby,
amid the cries, jeer, and laughter of the multitudes then
assembled and in hearing.

ARTICLE XI.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States,
unmindful of the high duties of his office, and of his oath of
offce, and in disregard of the Constitution and laws of the
United States, did, heretofore, to wit, on the eighteenth day of
August, A. D. eighteen hundred and sixty-six, at the City of
Washington, and the District of Columbia, by public speech,
declare and affirm, in substance, that the thirty-ninth Congress
of the United States was not a Congress of the United States
authorized by the Constitution to exercise legislative power
under the same. but, on the contrary, was a Congress of only part
of the States, thereby denying, and intending to deny, that the
legislation of said Congress was valid or obligatory upon him,
the said Andrew Johnson, except in so far as he saw fit to
approve the same, and also thereby denying, and intending to
deny, the power of the said thirty-ninth Congress to .propose
amendments to the Constitution of the United States; and, in
pursuance of said declaration, the said Andrew Johnson, President
of the United States, afterwards, to-wit, on the twenty first day
of February, A. D. eighteen hundred and sixty-eight, at the city
of Washington, in the District of Columbia, did, unlawfully, and
in disregard of the requirements of the Constitution that he
should take care that the laws be faithfully executed, attempt to
prevent the execution of an act entitled "An act regulating the
tenure of certain civil offices," passed March second, eighteen
hundred and sixty-seven, by unlawfully devising and contriving,
and attempting to devise and contrive means by which he should
prevent Edwin M. Stanton from forthwith resuming the functions of
the office of Secretary for the Department of War,
notwithstanding the refusal of the Senate to concur in the
suspension theretofore made by said Andrew Johnson of said Edwin
M. Stanton from said office of Secretary for the Department of
War; and, also, by further unlawfully devising and contriving,
and attempting to devise and contrive means, then and there, to
prevent the execution of an act entitled "An act making
appropriations for the support of the army for the fiscal year
ending June thirtieth, eighteen hundred and sixty-eight, and for
other purposes," approved March second, eighteen hundred and
sixty-seven; and also, to prevent the execution of an act
entitled "An act to provide for the more efficient government of
the rebel States," passed March second, eighteen hundred and
sixty-seven, whereby the said Andrew Johnson, President of the
United States, did then, to wit, on the twentyfirst day of
February, A. D. eighteen hundred and sixty-eight, at the city of
Washington, commit, and was guilty of, a high misdemeanor in
office.

Schuyler Colfax, Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Attest: Edward McPherson, Clerk of the House of Representatives.


At the conclusion of the reading of the Articles of Impeachment,
the President of the Senate responded that "the Senate will take
order upon the subject of impeachment, of which proper notice
will be given to the House of Representatives."

In addition to the Speaker and Managers, a large number of the
members of the House of Representatives were present to witness
the extraordinary and impressive proceedings, and at its close
all withdrew and the Senate resumed the routine business of the
day's session.

On Monday, March 23rd, 1868, the President, by his attorneys,
appeared at the bar of the Senate and made answer to the several
Articles of Impeachment, as follows:

(Answer to only the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 11th Articles, are here
given, as the 2nd, 3rd and 11th were the only Articles put to
vote--all others being abandoned, and as the 1st Article, though
never put to vote, contained practically all there was of the
impeachment.)

ANSWER TO ARTICLE I.

For answer to the first article he said: That Edwin M. Stanton
was appointed Secretary for the Department of War on the 15th day
of January, A. D. 1862, by Abraham Lincoln, then President of the
United States, during the first term of his presidency, and was
commissioned, according to the Constitution and laws of the
United States, to hold the said office during the pleasure of the
President; that the office of Secretary for the Department of
War was created by an act of the first Congress in its first
session, passed on the 7th day of August, A.D. 1789, and in and
by that act it was provided and enacted that the said Secretary
for the Department of War shall perform and execute such duties
as shall from time to time be enjoined on and intrusted to him by
the President of the United States, agreeably to the
Constitution, relative to the subjects within the scope of said
department; and furthermore, that the Secretary shall conduct
the business of the said department in such a manner as the
President of the United States shall, from time to time, order
and instruct.

And this respondent further answering, says that by force of the
act aforesaid and by reason of his appointment aforesaid the said
Stanton became the principal officer in one of the executive
departments of the government within the true, intent and meaning
of the second section of the second article of the Constitution
of the United States, and according to the true intent and
meaning of that provision of the Constitution of the United
States: and, in accordance with the settled and uniform practice
of each and every President of the United States, the said
Stanton then became, and so long as he should continue to hold
the said office of Secretary for the Department of War must
continue to be, one of the advisers of the President of the
United States, as well as the person intrusted to act for and
represent the President in matters enjoined upon him or entrusted
to him by the President touching the department aforesaid, and
for whose conduct in such capacity, subordinate to the President,
the President is, by the Constitution and laws of the United
States, made responsible.

And this respondent, further answering, says he succeeded to the
office of President of the United States upon, and by reason of,
the death of Abraham Lincoln, then President of the United
States, on the 13th day of April, 1865, and the said Stanton was
then holding the said office of Secretary for the Department of
War under and by reason of the appointment and commission
aforesaid; and, not having been removed from the said office by
this respondent, the said Stanton continued to hold the same
under the appointment and commission aforesaid, at the pleasure
of the President, until the time hereinafter particularly
mentioned: and at no time received any appointment or commission
save as above detailed.

And this repondent, further answering, says that on and prior to
the 5th day of August, A. D. 1867, this respondent, the President
of the United States. responsible for the conduct of the
Secretary for the Department of War, and having the
constitutional right to resort to and rely upon the person
holding that office for advice concerning the great and difficult
public duties enjoined on the President by the Constitution and
laws of the United States, became satisfied that he could not
allow the said Stanton to continue to hold the office of
Secretary for the Department of War without hazard of the public
interest; that the relations between the said Stanton and the
President no longer permitted the President to resort to him for
advice, or to be, in the judgment of the President, safely
responsible for his conduct of the affairs of the Department of
War, as by law required, in accordance with the orders and
instructions of the President; and thereupon, by force of the
Constitution and laws of the United States, which devolve on the
President the power and the duty to control the conduct of the
business of that executive department of the government, and by
reason of the constitutional duty of the President to take care
that the laws be faithfully executed, this respondent did
necessarily consider and did determine that the said Stanton
ought no longer to hold the said office of Secretary for the
Department of War. And this respondent, by virtue of the power
and authority vested in him as President of the United States by
the Constitution and laws of the United States, to give effect to
such his decision and determination, did, on the 5th day of
August, A. D. 1867, address to the said Stanton a note, of which
the following is a true copy:

Sir:--Public considerations of a high character constrain me to
say that your resignation as Secretary of War will be accepted.

To which note the said Stanton made the following reply:

War Department, Washington, August 5, 1867.

Sir:-Your note of this day has been received, stating that public
considerations of a high character constrain you "to say that my
resignation its Secretary of War will be accepted."

In reply I have the honor to say that public considerations of a
high character, which alone have induced me to continue at the
head of this department, constrain me not to resign the office of
Secretary of War before the next meeting of Congress.

Very respectfully yours. Edwin M. Stanton.


This respondent, as President of the United States, was thereon
of opinion that, having regard to the necessary official
relations and duties of the Secretary for the Department of War
to the President of the United States according to the
Constitution and laws of the United States, and having regard to
the responsibility of the President for the conduct of the said
Secretary, and having regard to the permanent executive authority
of the office which the respondent holds under the Constitution
and laws of the United States, it was impossible, consistently
with the public interests, to allow the said Stanton to continue
to hold the said office of Secretary for the Department of War;
and it then became the official duty of the respondent, as
President of the United States, to consider and decide what act
or acts should and might lawfully be done by him, as President of
the United States, to cause the said Stanton to surrender the
said office.

This respondent was informed and verily believed that it was
practically settled by the first Congress of the United States,
and had been so considered and uniformly and in great numbers of
instances acted on by each Congress and President of the United
States, in succession, from President Washington to, and
including President Lincoln, and from the first Congress to the
thirty-ninth Congress, that the Constitution of the United States
conferred on the President, as part of the executive power and as
one of the necessary means and instruments of performing the
executive duty expressly imposed on him by the Constitution of
taking care that the laws be faithfully executed, the power at
any and all times of removing from office all executive officers
for cause to be judged of by the President alone. This respondent
had, in pursuance of the Constitution, required the opinion of
each principal officer of the executive departments, upon this
question of constitutional executive power and duty, and had been
advised by each of them, including the said Stanton, Secretary
for the Department of War, that under the Constitution of the
United States this power was lodged by the Constitution in the
President of the United States, and that consequently, it could
be lawfully exercised by him, and the Congress could not deprive
him thereof; and this respondent, in his capacity of President of
the United States, and because in that capacity he was both
enabled and bound to use his best judgment upon this question,
did. in good faith and with an earnest desire to arrive at the
truth, come to the conclusion and opinion, and did make the same
known to the honorable the Senate of the United States by a
message dated on the 2nd day of March, 1867, that the power last
mentioned was conferred and the duty of exercising it, in fit
cases, was imposed on the President by the Constitution of the
United States, and that the President could not be deprived of
this, power or relieved of this duty, nor could the same be
vested by law in the President and the Senate jointly, either in
part or whole.

This respondent was also then aware that by the first section of
"An act regulating the tenure of certain civil offices," passed
March 2, 1867, by a constitutional majority of both houses of
Congress, it was enacted as follows:

"That every person holding any civil office to which he has been
appointed by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, and
every person who shall hereafter be appointed to any such office,
and shall become duly qualified to act therein, is and shall be
entitled to hold such office until a successor shall have been in
like manner appointed and duly qualified, except as herein
otherwise provided: Provided, That the Secretaries of State, of
the Treasury, of War, of the Navy, and of the Interior, the
Postmaster General, and the Attorney General shall hold their
offices respectively for and during the term of the President by
whom they may have been appointed, and one month thereafter,
subject to removal by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate."

This respondent was also aware that this act was understood and
intended to be an expression of the opinion of the Congress by
which that act was passed, that the power to remove executive
officers for cause might, by law, be taken from the President and
vested in him and the Senate jointly; and although this
respondent had arrived at and still retained the opinion above
expressed, and verily believed, as he still believes, that the
said first section of the last mentioned act was and is wholly
inoperative and void by reason of its conflict with the
Constitution of the United States, yet, inasmuch as the same had
been enacted by the constitutional majority in each of the two
houses of that Congress, this respondent considered it to be
proper to examine and decide whether the particular case of the
said Stanton, on which it was this respondent's duty to act, was
within or without the terms of that first section of the act; or,
if within it, whether the President had not the power, according
to the terms of the act, to remove the said Stanton from the
office of Secretary for the Department of War, and having, in his
capacity of President of the United States, so examined and
considered, did form the opinion that the case of the said
Stanton and his tenure of office were not affected by the first
section of the last-named act.

And this respondent, further answering, says, that although a
case thus existed which, in his judgment as President of the
United States, called for the exercise of the executive power to
remove the said Stanton from the office of Secretary for the
Department of War, and although this respondent was of the
opinion, as is above shown, that under the Constitution of the
United States the power to remove the said Stanton from the said
office was vested in the President of the United States; and also
this respondent was also of the opinion, as is above shown, that
the case of the said Stanton was not affected by the first
section of the last named act, and although each of the said
opinions had been formed by this respondent upon an actual case,
requiring him, in his capacity of President of the United States.
to come to some judgment and determination thereon, yet this
respondent, as President of the United States, desired and
determined to avoid, if possible, any question of the
construction and effect of the said first section of the last
named act, and also the broader question of the executive power
conferred on the President of the United States, by the
Constitution of the United States, to remove one of the principal
officers of one of the executive departments for cause seeming to
him sufficient; and this respondent also desired and determined
that if, from causes over which he could exert no control, it
should become absolutely necessary to raise and have, in some
way, determined either or both of the said last named questions,
it was in accordance with the Constitution of the United States,
and was required of the President thereby, that questions
of so much gravity and importance, upon which the legislative and
executive departments of the government had disagreed, which
involved powers considered by all branches of the government,
during its entire history down to the year 1867, to have been
confided by the Constitution of the United States to the
President, and to be necessary for the complete and proper
execution of his constitutional duties, should be in some proper
way submitted to that judicial department of the government
instrusted by the Constitution with the power, and subjected by
it to the duty, not only of determining finally the construction
of and effect of all acts of Congress. but of comparing them with
the Constitution of the United States and pronouncing them
inoperative when found in conflict with that fundamental law
which the people have enacted for the government of all their
servants. And to these ends, first, that, through the action of
the Senate of the United States, the absolute duty of the
President to substitute some fit person in place of Mr. Stanton
as one of his advisers, and as a principal subordinate officer
whose official conduct he was responsible for and had lawful
right to control, might, if, possible. be accomplished without
the necessity of raising any one of the questions aforesaid; and,
second, if this duty could not be so performed then that these
questions, or such of them as might necessarily arise, should be
judicially determined in manner aforesaid, and for no other end
or purpose, this respondent. as President of the United States,
on the 12th day of August, 1867, seven days after the reception
of the letter of the said Stanton of the 5th of August,
hereinbefore stated, did issue to the said Stanton the order
following namely:

Executive Mansion,
Washington, August 12, 1867.

Sir:--By virtue of the power and authority vested in me as
President by the Constitution and laws of the United States, you
are hereby suspended from office as Secretary of War, and will
cease to exercise any and all functions pertaining to the same.

You will at once transfer to General Ulysses S. Grant, who has
this day been authorized and empowered to act as Secretary of War
ad interim, all records, books, papers, and other public property
now in your custody and charge.
To Hon. Edwin M. Stanton, Secretary of War.

To which said order the said Stanton made the following reply:

War Department, Washington City, August 12, 1867.

Sir:--Your note of this date has been received, informing me
that, by virtue of the powers vested in you as President by the
Constitution and laws of the United States, I am suspended from
office as Secretary of War, and will cease to exercise any and
all functions pertaining to the same, and also directing me at
once to transfer to General Ulysses S. Grant, who has this day
been authorized and empowered to act as Secretary of War ad
interim, all records, books, papers, and other public property
now in my custody and charge. Under a sense of public duty I am
compelled to deny your right, under the Constitution and laws of
the United States, without the advice and consent of the senate,
and without legal cause, to suspend me from office as Secretary
of War, or the exercise of any or all functions pertaining to the
same, or without such advice and consent to compel me to transfer
to any person the records, books, papers, and public property in
my custody as Secretary, But inasmuch as the General commanding
the Armies of the United has been appointed ad interim and has
notified me that he has accepted the appointment, I have no
alternative but to submit, under protest, to superior force.

To the President.


And this respondent, further answering, says, that it is provided
in and by the second section of "An act to regulate the tenure of
certain civil offices," that the President may suspend an officer
from the performance of the duties of the office held by him, for
certain causes therein designated, until the next meeting of the
Senate, and until the case shall be acted on by the senate; that
this respondent, as President of the United States, was advised,
and he verily believed and still believes, that the executive
power of removal from office confided to him by the Constitution
as aforesaid includes the power of suspension from office at the
pleasure of the President, and this respondent, by the order
aforesaid, did suspend the said Stanton from office, not until
the next meeting of the Senate, or until the Senate should have
acted upon the case, but by force of the power and authority
vested in him by the Constitution and laws of the United States,
indefinitely and at the pleasure of the President, and the order,
in form aforesaid, was made known to the Senate of the United
States on the 12th day of December, A. D. 1867, as will be more
fully hereinafter stated.

And this respondent, further answering, says, that in and by the
act of February 13, 1795, it was, among other things, provided
and enacted that, in case of vacancy in the office of Secretary
for the Department of War, it shall be lawful for the President,
in case he shall think it necessary, to authorize any person to
perform the duties of that office until a successor be appointed
or such vacancy filled, but not exceeding the term of six months;
and this respondent, being advised and believing that such law
was in full force and not repealed, by an order dated August 12,
1867, did authorize and empower Ulysses S. Grant, General of the
armies of the United States, to act as Secretary for the
Department of War ad interim, in the form in which similar
authority had theretofore been given, not until the next meeting
of the Senate and until the Senate should act on the case, but at
the pleasure of the President, subject only to the limitation of
six months in the said last-mentioned act contained; and a copy
of the last-named order was made known to the Senate of the
United States on the 12th day of December, 1867, as will be
hereinafter more fully stated: and in pursuance of the design and
intention aforesaid, if it should become necessary to submit the
said question to a judicial determination, this respondent, at or
near the date of the last-mentioned order, did make known such
his purpose to obtain a judicial decision of the said question,
or such of them as might be necessary.

And this respondent, further answering, says, that in further
pursuance of his intention and design, if possible, to perform
what he judged to be his imperative duty, to prevent the said
Stanton from longer holding the office of Secretary for the
Department of War, and at the same time avoiding, if possible,
any question respecting the extent of the power of removal from
executive office confided to the President by the Constitution of
the United States, and any question respecting the construction
and effect of the first section of the said "act regulating the
tenure of certain civil offices," while he should not, by any act
of his, abandon and relinquish, either a power which he believed
the Constitution had conferred on the President of the United
States, to enable him to perform the duties of his office, or, a
power designedly left to him by the first section of the act of
Congress last aforesaid, this respondent did, on the 12th day of
December, 1867, transmit to the senate of the United States a
message a copy whereof is hereunto annexed and marked B, wherein
he made known the orders aforesaid and the reasons which had
induced the same. so far as this respondent then considered it
material and necessary that the same should be set forth, and
reiterated his views concerning the constitutional power of
removal vested in the President, and also expressed his views
concerning the construction of the said first section of the last
mentioned act, as respected the power of the President to remove
the said Stanton from the said office of Secretary for the
Department of War, well hoping that this respondent could thus
perform what he then believed, and still believes, to be his
imperative duty in reference to the said Stanton, without
derogating from the powers which this respondent believed were
confided to the President, by the Constitution and laws, and
without the necessity of raising, judicially, any questions
respecting the same.

And this respondent, further answering, says, that this hope not
having been realized, the President was compelled either to allow
the said Stanton to resume the said office and remain therein
contrary to the settled convictions of the President, formed as
aforesaid respecting the powers confided to him and the duties
required of him by the Constitution of the United States, and
contrary to the opinion formed as aforesaid, that the first
section of the last mentioned act did not affect the case of the
said Stanton, and contrary to the fixed belief of the President
that he could no longer advise with or trust or be responsible
for the said Stanton, for the said office of Secretary for the
Department of War, or else he was compelled to take such steps as
might, in the judgment of the President, be lawful and necessary
to raise, for a judicial decision, the questions affecting the
lawful right of the said Stanton to resume the said office, or
the power of the said Stanton to persist in refusing to quit the
said office if he should persist in actually refusing to quit the
same; and to this end, and to this end only, this respondent did,
on the 21st day of February, 1868 issue the order for the removal
of the said Stanton, in the said first article mentioned and set
forth, and the order authorizing the said Lorenzo F. Thomas to
act as Secretary of War ad interim, in the said second article
set forth.

And this respondent, proceeding to answer specifically each
substantial allegation in the said first article, says: He denies
that the said Stanton, on the 21st day of February, 1868, was
lawfully in possession of the said ofce of Secretary for the
Department of War. He denies that the said Stanton, on the day
last mentioned, was lawfully entitled to hold the said office
against the will of the President of the United States. He denies
that the said order for the removal of the said Stanton was
unlawfully issued. He denies that the said order was issued with
intent to violate the act entitled "An act to regulate the tenure
of certain civil offices." He denies that the said order was a
violation of the last mentioned act. He denies that the said
order was a violation of the Constitution of the United States,
or of any law thereof, or of his oath of office. He denies that
the said order was issued with an intent to violate the
Constitution of the United States or any law thereof, or this
respondent's oath of office; and he respectfully, but earnestly.
insists that not only was it issued by him in the performance of
what he believed to be an imperative official duty, but in the
performance of what this honorable court will consider was.in
point of fact. an imperative official duty. And he denies that
any and all substantive matters, in the said first article
contained, in manner and form as the same are therein stated and
set forth, do, by law, constitute a high misdemeanor in office,
within the true intent and meaning of the Constitution of the
United States.

ANSWER TO ARTICLE II.

And for answer to the second article, this respondent says that
he admits he did issue and deliver to said Lorenzo Thomas the
said writing set forth in said second article, bearing date at
Washington, District of Columbia, February 21, 1868, addressed to
Brevet Major General Lorenzo Thomas, Adjutant General United
States army, Washington, District of Columbia, and he further
admits that the same was so issued without the advice and consent
of the Senate of the United States, then in session; but he
denies that he thereby violated the Constitution of the United
States, or any law thereof, or that he did thereby intend to
violate the Constitution of the United States or the provisions
of any act of Congress; and this respondent refers to his answer
to said first articles for a full statement of the purposes and
intentions with which said order was issued, and adopts the same
as part of his answer to this article; and he further denies that
there was then and there no vacancy in the said office of
Secretary for the Department of War, or that he did then and
there commit or was guilty of a high misdemeanor in office; and
this respondent maintains and will insist:

1. That at the date and delivery of said writing there was a
vacancy existing in the office of Secretary for the Department
of War.

2. That notwithstanding the Senate of the United States was then
in session, it was lawful and according to long and well
established usage to empower and authorize the said Thomas to act
as Secretary of War ad interim.

3. That if the said act regulating the tenure of civil offices be
held to be a valid law, no provision of the same was violated by
the issuing of said order or by the designation of said Thomas to
act as Secretary of War ad interim.

ANSWER TO ARTICLE III.

And for answer to said third article, this respondent says that
he abides by his answer to said first and second articles in so
far as the same are responsive to the allegations contained in
the said third article, and, without here again repeating the
same answer, prays the same be taken as an answer to this third
article as fully as if here again set out at length; and as to
the new allegation contained in said third article, that this
respondent did appoint the said Thomas to be Secretary for the
Department of War ad interim, this respondent denies that he gave
any other authority to said Thomas than such as appears in said
written authority set out in said article, by which he authorized
and empowered said Thomas to act as Secretary for the Department
of War ad interim; and he denies that the same amounts to an
appointment, and insists that it is only a designation of an
officer of that department to act temporarily as Secretary for
the Department of War ad interim, until an appointment should be
made. But whether the said written authority amounts to an
appointment or to a temporary authority or designation, this
respondent denies that in any sense he did thereby intend to
violate the Constitution of the United States, or that he thereby
intended to give the said order the character or effect of an
appointment in the constitutional or legal sense of that term. He
further denies that there was no vacancy in said office of
Secretary for the Department of War existing at the date of said
written authority.

ANSWER TO ARTICLE XI.

And in answer to the eleventh article, this respondent denies
that on the 18th day of August, in the year 1866, at the City of
Washington, in the District of Columbia, he did, by public speech
or otherwise, declare or affirm, in substance or at all, that the
thirty-ninth Congress of the United States was not a Congress of
the United States authorized by the constitution to exercise
legislative power under the same, or that he did then and there
declare or affirm that the said thirty-ninth Congress was a
Congress of only part of the States in any sense or meaning other
than that ten States of the Union were denied representation
therein; or that he made any or either of the declarations or
affrmations in this behalf, in the said article alleged, as
denying or intending to deny that the legislation of said
thirty-ninth Congress was valid or obligatory upon this
respondent, except so far as this respondent saw fit to approve
the same; and as to the allegation in said article, that be did
thereby intend or mean to be understood that the said Congress
had not power to propose amendments to the Constitution, this
respondent says that in said address he said nothing in reference
to the subject of amendments of the Constitution. nor was the
question of the competency of the said Congress to propose such
amendments, without the participation of said excluded States. at
the time of said address in any way mentioned or considered or
referred to by this respondent. nor in what he did say had he any
intent regarding the same, and he denies the allegation so made
to the contrary thereof. But this respondent, in further answer
to, and in respect of, the said allegations of the said eleventh
article hereinbefore traversed and denied, claims and insists
upon his personal and official right of freedom of opinion and
freedom of speech, and his duty in his political relations as
President of the United States to the people of the United States
in the exercise of such freedom of opinion and freedom of speech,
in the same manner, form and effect as he has in this behalf
stated the same in his answer to the said tenth article, and with
the same effect as if he here repeated the same; and he further
claims and insists, as in said answer to said tenth article he
has claimed and insisted, that he is not subject to question,
inquisition, impeachment, or inculpation, in any form or manner,
of or concerning such rights of freedom of opinion or freedom of
speech or his alleged exercise thereof.

And this respondent further denies that on the 21st day of
February, in the year 1868, or at any other time, at the City of
Washington, in the District of Columbia, in pursuance of any such
declaration as is in that behalf in said eleventh article
alleged, or otherwise, he did unlawfully, and in disregard of the
requirement of the Constitution that he should take care that the
laws should be faithfully executed, attempt to prevent the
execution of an act entitled "An act regulating the tenure of
certain civil offices," passed March 2, 1867, by unlawfully
devising or contriving, or attempting to devise or contrive,
means by which he should prevent Edwin M. Stanton from forthwith
resuming the functions of Secretary for the Department of War,
or by lawfully devising or contriving, or attempting to devise or
contrive, means to prevent the execution of an act entitled "An
act making appropriations for the support of the army for the
fiscal year ending June 30, 1868, and for other purposes,"
approved March 2, 1867, or to prevent the execution of an act
entitled "An act to provide for the more efficient government of
the rebel States," passed March 2, 1867.

And this respondent, further answering the said eleventh article,
says that he has, in his answer to the first article, set forth
in detail the acts, steps, and proccedings done and taken by this
respondent to and toward or in the matter of the suspension or
removal of the said Edwin M. Stanton in or from the office of
Secretary for the Department of War, with the times, modes,
circumstances, intents, views, purposes, and opinions of official
obligation and duty under and with which such acts, steps, and
proceedings were done and taken; and he makes answer to this
eleventh article of the matters in his answer to the first
article, pertaining to the suspension or removal of said Edwin M.
Stanton, to the same intent and effect as if they were here
repeated and set forth.

And this deponent, further answering the said eleventh article,
denies that by means or reason of anything in said article
alleged, this respondent, as President of the United States, did,
on the 21st day of February, 1868, or at any other day or time.
commit, or that he was guilty of, a high misdemeanor in office.

And this respondent, further answering the said eleventh article,
says that the same and the matters therein contained do not
charge or allege the commission of any act whatever by this
respondent, in his office of President of the United States, nor
the omission by this respondent of any act of official obligation
or duty in his office of President of the United States; nor does
the said article nor the matters therein contained name
designate, describe, or define any act or mode or form of
attempt, device, contrivance, or means, or of attempt at device,
contrivance or means, whereby this respondent can know or
understand what act or mode or form of attempt, device,
contrivance or means, or of attempt at device, contrivance, or
means are imputed to or charged against this respondent, in his
office of President of the United States, or intended so to be,
or whereby this respondent can more fully or definitely make
answer unto the said article than he hereby does.

And this respondent, in submitting to this honorable court this
his answer to the articles of impeachment exhibited against him,
respectfully reserves leave to amend and add to the same from
time to time, as may become necessary or proper, and when and as
such necessity and propriety shall appear.
Andrew Johnson
Henry Stanbery, B. R. Curtis, Thomas A. R. Nelson, William M.
Evarts. W. S. Groesbeck. Of Counsel.



CHAPTER VIII. ORGANIZATION OF THE COURT ARGUMENT OF COUNSEL

On Thursday, March 5th, 1868, the Senate of the United States was
organized for the trial of the charges brought against Andrew
Johnson, President of the United States, by the House of
Representatives--Honorable Salmon P. Chase, Chief Justice of the
United States, presiding.

The following gentlemen appeared as managers of the prosecution
on the part of the House:

Hon. John A. Bingham, of Ohio; Hon. George S. Boutwell, of
Massachusetts; Hon. James F. Wilson, of Iowa; Hon. John A. Logan,
of Illinois; Hon. Thomas F. Williams, of Pennsylvania; Hon.
Benjamin F. Butler, of Massachusetts; and Hon. Thaddeus Stevens,
of Pennsylvania.

The following gentlemen appeared as counsel for the President:

Messrs. Henry Stanbery, of Kentucky; Benjamin R. Curtis, of
Massachusetts; Thomas A. R. Nelson, of Tennessee; William M.
Evarts, of New York, and William S. Groesbeck, of Ohio.

The following gentlemen comprised the United States Senate,
sitting for the trial of the President:

California-Cornelius Cole, (R)-John Conness, (R).
Connecticut-James Dixon, (D)-Orris S. Ferry, (R).
Delaware-Willard Saulsbury, (D)-James A. Bayard, (D).
Illinois-Lyman Trumbull, (R)-Richard Yates, (R).
Indiana-Oliver P. Morton, (R)-Thomas A. Hendricks, (D).
Iowa-James W. Grimes, (R)-James Harlan, (R).
Kansas-Samuel C. Pomeroy, (R)-Edmund G. Ross, (R).
Kentucky-Thomas C. McCreary, (D)-Garrett Davis, (D).
Massachusetts-Charles Sumner, (R)-Henry Wilson, (R).
Maine-William Pitt Fessenden, (R)-Lot M. Morrill, (R).
Maryland-Reverdy Johnson, (D)-George Vickers, (D).
Michigan-Zachariah Chandler, (R)-Jacob M. Howard, (R).
Missouri-John B. Henderson, (R)-Charles D. Drake, (R).
Minnesota-Alexander Ramsay, (R)-Daniel S. Norton, (D).
New York-Roscoe Conkling, (R)-Edwin D. Morgan, (R).
Nevada-James W. Nye, (R)-William M. Stewart, (R).
Nebraska-Thomas W. Tipton, (R)-John M. Thayer, (R).
New Jersey-Alexander G. Cattell, (R)-F. T. Frelinghuysen, (R).
New Hampshire-Alexander H. Craigin, (R)-Jas. W. Patterson, (R).
Ohio-John Sherman, (R)-Benjamin F. Wade, (R).
Oregon-Henry W. Corbett, (R)-Geo. H. Williams, (R).
Pennsylvania-Simon Cameron, (R)-Charles R. Buckalew, (D).
Rhode Island-Henry B. Anthony, (R)-William Sprague, (R).
Tennessee--David T. Patterson, (D)-Joseph S. Fowler, (R).
Vermont-George F. Edmunds, (R)-Justin S. Morrill, (R).
West Virginia-W. T. Willey,(R)-Peter (3. Van Winkle, (R).
Wisconsin-James R. Doolittle, (D)-Timothy O. Howe, (R).
[Forty-two Republicans and twelve Democrats.]

The House bringing the Impeachment was three-fourths
Republican--the Senate that tried it was more than threefourths
Republican-the managers on the part of the House were all
Republicans--the counsel for the President were three Democrats
and one Republican--the President on trial was a Democrat--the
interrogatories propounded to witnesses were generally received
or rejected, according as their probable answers would make for
or against the President--the people of the country at large
were, as a rule, rigidly divided on party lines relative to the
case, Republicans demanding the conviction of the President and
Democrats urging his acquittal. The Chief Justice presiding in
the trial was the only strictly nonpartisan factor in the case.

The answer of the President to the Articles of Impeachment having
been presented on the 23rd of March, 1868--the replication of the
House duly made, and all the preliminary steps completed, the
proceedings in the actual trial commenced on the 30th day of
March, 1868. Gen. Butler, one of the managers on the part of the
House, made the opening argument for the prosecution, from which
the following extracts are taken:

The first eight articles set out in several distinct forms the
acts of the respondent removing Mr. Stanton from office, and
appointing Mr. Thomas, ad interim, differing in legal effect in
the purposes for which and the intent with which, either or both
of the acts were done, and the legal duties and rights infringed,
and the acts of Congress violated in so doing.

All the articles allege these acts to be in contravention of his
oath of office, and in disregard of the duties thereof.

If they are so, however, the President might have the POWER to do
them under the law; still, being so done, they are acts of
official misconduct, and as we have seen, impeachable.

The President has the legal power to do many acts which, if done
in disregard of his duty, or for improper purposes, then the
exercise of that power is an official misdemeanor.

Ex. gr: he has the power of pardon; if exercised in a given case
for a corrupt motive, as for the payment of money, or wantonly
pardoning all criminals, it would be a misdemeanor. Examples
might be multiplied indefinitely.

Article first, stripped of legal verbiage, alleges that, having
suspended Mr. Stanton and reported the same to the Senate, which
refused to concur in the suspension, and Stanton having
rightfully resumed the duties of his office, the respondent, with
knowledge of the facts, issued an order which is recited for
Stanton's removal, with intent to violate the act of March 2,
1867, to regulate the tenure of certain civil offices, and with
the further intent to remove Stanton from the office of Secretary
of War, then in the lawful discharge of its duties, in
contravention of said act without the advice and consent of the
Senate, and against the Constitution of the United States.

Article 2 charges that the President, without authority of law,
on the 21st of February, 1868, issued letter of authority to
Lorenzo Thomas to act as Secretary of War ad interim, the Senate
being in session, in violation of the tenure-of-office act, and
with intent to violate it and the Constitution, there being no
vancancy in the office of Secretary of War.

Article 3 alleges the same act as done without authority of law,
and alleges an intent to violate the Constitution.

Article 4 charges that the President conspired with Lorenzo
Thomas and divers other persons, with intent, by INTIMIDATION AND
THREATS, to prevent Mr. Stanton from holding the office of
Secretary of War, in violation of the Constitution and of the act
of July 31, 1861.

Article 5 charges the same conspiracy with Thomas to prevent Mr.
Stanton's holding his office, and thereby to prevent the
execution of the civil tenure act.

Article 6 charges that the President conspired with Thomas to
seize and possess the property under the control of the War
Department by FORCE, in contravention of the act of July 31,
1861, and with intent to disregard the civil tenure-of-office
act.

Article 7 charges the same conspiracy, with intent only to
violate the civil tenure-ofoffice act.

Articles 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th may all be considered
together, as to to the proof to support them.

It will be shown that having removed Stanton and appointed
Thomas, the President sent Thomas to the War Office to obtain
possession; that having been met by Stanton with a denial of his
rights, Thomas retired, and after consultation with the
President, Thomas asserted his purpose to take possession of the
War Office by force, making his boast in several public places of
his intentions so to do, but was prevented by being promptly
arrested by process from the court.

This will be shown by the evidence of Hon. Mr. Van Horn, a member
of the House, who was present when the demand for possession of
the War office was made by General Thomas, already made public.

By the testimony of the Hon. Mr. Burleigh, who, after that, in
the evening of the twenty-first of February, was told by Thomas
that he intended to take possession of the War Office by force
the following morning, and invited him up to see the performance.
Mr. Burleigh attended, but the act did not come off, for Thomas
had been arrested and held to bail.

By Thomas boasting at Willard's hotel on the same evening that he
should call on General Grant for military force to put him in
possession of the office, and he did not see how Grant could
refuse it. Article 8 charges that the appointment of Thomas was
made for the purpose of getting control of the disbursement of
the moneys appropriated for the military service and Department
of War.

In addition to the proof already adduced, it will be shown that,
after the appointment of Thomas, which must have been known to
the members of his cabinet, the President caused a formal notice
to be served on the Secretary of the Treasury, to the end that
the Secretary might answer the requisitions for money of Thomas,
and this was only prevented by the firmness with which Stanton
retained possession of the books and papers of the War office.
It will be seen that every fact charged in Article 1 is admitted
by the answer of the respondent; the intent also admitted as
charged; that is to say, to set aside the civil tenure-of-office
act, and to remove Mr. Stanton from the office of the Secretary
for the Department of War without the advice and consent of the
Senate, and, if not justified, contrary to the provisions of the
Constitution itself.

The only question remaining is, does the respondent justify
himself by the Constitution and laws?

On this he avers, that by the Constitution, there is "conferred
on the President as a part of the executive power, the power at
any and all times of removing from office all executive officers
for cause, to be judged of by the President alone, and that he
verily believes that the executive power of removal from office,
confided to him by the Constitution, as aforesaid, includes the
power of suspension from office indefinitely."

Now, these offices, so vacated, must be filled, temporarily at
least, by his appointment, because government must go on; there
can be no interregnum in the execution of the laws in an
organized government; he claims, therefore, of necessity, the
right to fill their places with appointments of his choice, and
that this power can not be restrained or limited in any degree by
any law of Congress, because, he avers, "that the power was
conferred, and the duty of exercising it in fit cases was imposed
on the President by the Constitution of the United States, and
that the President could not be deprived of this power, or
relieved of this duty, nor could the same be vested by law in the
President and the Senate jointly, either in part or whole."

This, then, is the plain and inevitable issue before the Sehate
and the American people:

Has the President, under the Constitution, the more than kingly
prerogative at will to remove from office and suspend from office
indefinitely, all executive officers of the United States, either
civil, military or naval, at any and all times, and fill the
vacancies with creatures of his own appointment, for his own
purposes, without any restraint whatever, or possibility of
restraint by the Senate or by Congress through laws duly enacted?

The House of Representatives, in behalf of the people join this
issue by affirming that the exercise of such powers is a high
misdemeanor in office.

If the affirmative is maintained by the respondent, then, so far
as the first eight articles are concerned--unless such corrupt
purposes are shown as will of themselves make the exercise of a
legal power a crime--the respondent must go, and ought to go quit
and free.

Therefore, by these articles and the answers thereto, the
momentous question, here and now, is raised whether the
PRESIDENTIAL OFFICE ITSELF (IF IT HAS THE PREROGATIVES AND POWER
CLAIMED FOR IT) OUGHT, IN FACT, TO EXIST AS APART OF THE
CONSTITUTIONAL GOVERNMENT OF A FREE PEOPLE, while by the last
three articles the simpler and less important inquiry is to be
determined, whether Andrew Johnson has so conducted himself that
he ought longer to held any constitutional office whatever. The
latter sinks to merited insignificance compared with the grandeur
of the former.

If that is sustained, then a right and power hitherto unclaimed
and unknown to the people of the country is engrafted on the
Constitution most alarming in its extent, most corrupting in its
influence, most dangerous in its tendencies, and most tyrannical
in its exercise.

Whoever, therefore, votes "not guilty" on these articles votes to
enchain our free institutions, and to prostrate them at the feet
of any man who, being President, may choose to control them.

A few days after this, Judge Curtis, of the President's counsel,
spoke on behalf of the President. The first and principal
Goverment of the Articles of Impeachment against Mr. Johnson was
violation of the Office-Tenure Act, which had been passed the
year before for the undisguised purpose of restricting the
President's power to remove his Cabinet officers, particularly,
his War Minister, Mr. Stanton. It was apparent that Mr. Butler
had been embarassed in his plea by the proviso of that Act, that
members of the Cabinet should hold "during the term of the
President by WHOM THEY MAY HAVE BEEN APPOINTED and for one month
longer."

Mr. Butler had asked--By whom was Mr. Stanton appointed? By Mr.
Lincoln. Whose presidential term was he holding tinder when the
bullet of Booth became a proximate cause of this trial? Was not
this appointment in full force at that hour. Had any act of the
respondent up to the 12th day of August last vitiated or
interfered with that appointment? Whose Presidential term is the
respondent now serving out? His own, or Mr. Lincoln's. If his
own, he is entitled to four years up to the anniversary of the
murder, because each presidential term is four years by the
Constitution, and the regular recurrence of those terms is fixed
by the Act of May 8, 1792. If he is serving out the remainder of
Mr. Lincoln's term, then his term of office expires on the 4th of
March, 1869, if it does not before.

Judge Curtis struck his first blow at the weak point of General
Butler's speech. He said:

There is a question involved which enters deeply into the first
eight Articles of Impeachment and materially touches two of the
others; and to that question I desire in the first place to
invite the attention of the court, namely--whether MR. STANTON'S
CASE COMES UNDER THE TENURE-OF-OFFICE ACTS? * * * I must ask
your attention therefore to the construction and application of
the first section of that act, as follows: "that every person
holding an official position to which he has been appointed by
and with the advice and consent of the Senate, and every person
who shall hereafter be appointed to any such office and shall
become duly qualified to act therein, is and shall be entitled to
hold such office until a successor shall have been in like manner
appointed and duly qualified, except as herein OTHERWISE
PROVIDED." Then comes what is otherwise provided. PROVIDED,
HOWEVER, That the Secretaries of State, Treasury, War, Navy, and
Interior Departments, the Postmaster General and Attorney
General, shall hold their offices respectively for AND DURING THE
TERM OF THE PRESIDENT BY WHOM THEY MAY HAVE BEEN APPOINTED."

The first inquiry which arises on this language, is as to the
meaning of the words "for and during the term of the President."
Mr. Stanton, as appears by the commission which has been put in
the case by the Honorable Managers, was appointed in January,
1862, during the first term of President Lincoln. Are the words
"during the term of the President," applicable to Mr. Stanton's
case? That depends upon whether an expounder of this law,
judicially, who finds set down in it as a part of the descriptive
words, "DURING THE TERMS OF THE PRESIDENT," HAS ANY RIGHT TO ADD,
"AND DURING ANY OTHER TERM FOR WHICH HE MAY BE AFTERWARDS
ELECTED."

I respectfully submit no such judicial interpretation can be put
on the words. Then, if you please, take the next step: "During
the term of the President by whom he was appointed, "At the time
when this order was issued for the removal of Mr. Stanton, was he
holding the term of the President by whom he was appointed? The
Honorable Managers say yes; because, as they, say, Mr. Johnson is
merely serving out the residue of Mr. Lincoln's term. But is that
so under the provisions of the Constitution of the United States?
* * Although the President, like the Vice President, is elected
for a term of four years, and each is elected for the same term,
the President is not to hold the office absolutely during four
years. The limit of four years is not an absolute limit. Death is
a limit. "A conditional limitation," as the lawyers call it, is
imposed on his tenure of office. And when the President dies his
term of four years, for which he was elected and during which he
was to hold provided he should so long live, terminates, and the
office devolves upon the Vice President. For what period of time?
FOR THE REMAINDER OF THE TERM FOR WHICH THE VICE PRESIDENT WAS
ELECTED. And there is no more propriety, under the provisions of
the Constitution of the United litates, in calling the term
during which Mr. Johnson holds the office of President, after it
was devolved upon him, a part of Mr. Lincoln's term. then there
would be propriety in saying that one sovereign who succeeded
another sovereign by death, holds his predecessor's term.** They
(the Cabinet officers) were to be the advisers of the President;
they were to be the immediate confidential assistants of the
President, for whom he was to be responsible, but in whom he was
expected to repose a great amount of trust and confidence; and
therefore it was that this Act has connected the tenure-of-office
of these Secretaries to which it applies with the President by
whom they were appointed. It says, in the description which the
Act gives of the future tenure-of-office of Secretaries, that a
controlling regard is to be had to the fact that the Secretary
whose tenure is to be regulated was appointed by some particular
President; and during the term of that President he shall
continue to hold his office; but as for Secretaries who are in
office, not appointed by the President, we have nothing to say;
we leave them as they heretofore have been. I submit to Senators
that this is the natural, and, having regard to the character of
these officers, the necessary conclusion, that the
tenure-of-office of a Secretary here described is a tenure during
the term of service of the President by whom he was appointed;
that it was not the intention of Congress to compel a President
of the United States to continue in office a Secretary not
appointed by himself. * * *

Shortly after this, occurred one of the most amusing and
interesting incidents of the trial. Mr. Boutwell, who was
altogether a matter-of-fact man, though at times indulging in the
heroics, ventured, in the course of his argument, upon a flight
of imagination in depicting the punishment that should be meted
out to Mr. Johnson for venturing to differ with Congress upon the
constitutionality of an act of that body. He said:

Travelers and astronomers inform us that in the Southern heavens,
near the Southern cross, there is a vast space which the
uneducated call the "hole in the sky," where the eye of man,
with the aid of the powers of the telescope, has been unable to
discover nebulae, or asteroid, or comet, or planet, or star, or
sun. In that dreary, cold, dark region of space, which is only
known to be less infinite by the evidences of creation elsewhere,
the great author of celestial mechanism has left the chaos which
was in the beginning. If this earth were capable of the
sentiments and emotions of justice and virtue which in human
mortal beings are the evidences and pledge of our divine origin
and immortal destiny, it would heave and throb with the energy of
the elemental forces of nature, and project this enemy (referring
to President Johnson) of two races of men into that vast region,
there forever to exist in a solitude eternal as life or as the
absence of life, emblematical of. if not really, that outer
darkness of which the Savior of mankind spoke in warning to those
who are enemies to themselves and of their race and of God.

Mr. Evarts followed Mr. Boutwell, and in the course of his
argument referred to this paragraph in Mr. Boutwell's speech in
the following humorously sarcastic vein, during the delivery of
which, the Senate was repeatedly convulsed with laughter. Mr.
Evarts said:

I may as conveniently at this point of the argument as at any
other pay some attention to the astronomical punishment which
the learned and honorable manager Mr. Boutwell, thinks should
be applied to this novel case of impeachment of the President.
Cicero, I think it is, who says that a lawyer should know
everything, for sooner or later, there is no fact in history,
science or human knowledge that will not come into play in his
arguments. Painfully sensitive of my ignorance, being devoted to
a profession which "sharpens and does not enlarge the mind," I
yet can admire without envy the superior knowledge evinced by the
honorable manager. Indeed, upon my soul, I believe he is aware
of an astronomical fact which many professors of the science are
wholly ignorant of; but nevertheless, while some of his
colleagues were paying attention to an unoccupied and
unappropriated island on the surface of the seas, Mr. Manager
Boutwell, more ambitious, had discovered an untenated and
unappropriated region in the skies, reserved, he would have us
think, in the final councils of the Almighty as the place of
punishment for deposed and convicted American Presidents.

At first, I thought that his mind had become so enlarged that it
was not sharp enough to observe that the Constitution has limited
the punishment, but on reflection I saw that he was as legal and
logical as he was ambitious and astronomical; for the
Constitution has said "remove from office," and has put no limit
to the distance of removal so that it may be without the shedding
of a drop of his blood or taking a penny of his property, or
confining his limbs. Instant removal from office and
transportation to the skies. Truly this is a great undertaking,
and if the learned manager can only get over the obstacle of the
laws of nature, the Constitution will, not stand in his way.

He can contrive no method but that of a convulsion of the earth
that shall project the deposed President to this indefinitely
distant space; but a shock of nature of so vast an energy and for
so great a result on him might unsettle even the footing of the
firm members of Congress. We certainly need not resort to so
perilous a method as that. How shall we accomplish it? Why, in
the first place, nobody knows where that space is but the learned
manager himself, and he is the necessary deputy to execute the
judgment of the court. Let it then be provided that, in case of
your sentence of deposition and removal from office, the
honorable and astronomical manager shall take into his own hands
the execution of the sentence. With the President made fast to
his broad and strong shoulders, and having already assayed the
flight by imagination, better prepared than anybody else to
execute it in form, taking the advantage of ladders as far as
ladders will go to the top of this great capitol, and spurning
there with his foot the crest of Liberty, let him set out upon
his flight while the two houses of Congress and all the people of
the United States shall shout--"Sic itur ad astra!" But here a
distressing doubt strikes me. How will the manager get back. He
will have got far beyond the reach of gravitation to restore him,
and so ambitious a wing as his should never stoop to a downward
flight. Indeed, as he passes through the constellations, the
famous question of Carlyle (by which he derides the littleness of
human affairs upon the scale of the measure of the heavens,)
"What thinks Bootes as he drives his hunting dogs up the zenith
in their leash of sidereal fire?" will force itself on his
notice. What, indeed, will Bootes think of this new
constellation? Besides, reaching this space beyond the power of
Congress ever to send for persons and papers, how shall he
return, and how decide in the contest there become personal and
perpetual--the struggle of strength between him and the
President? In this new revolution thus established forever, who
shall decide which is the sun and which is the moon? Who
determine the only scientific test, which reflects hardest upon
the other?"


Gen. Logan, one of the managers, appeared for the prosecution,
upon the close of the examination of witnesses. The following is
a brief extract from his very long and labored argument, and
relates to the Tenure-of-Office Act:

It is a new method of ascertaining the meaning of a law, plain
upon its face, by resorting to legislative discussions, and
giving in evidence opinions affected by the law. As a matter of
fact; it is well known the act was intended to prevent the very
thing Mr. Johnson attempted in the matter of Mr. Stanton's
removal. I think this manner of defense will not avail before the
Senate. The law must govern in its natural and plain intendment,
and will not be frittered away by extraneous interpretation. The
President in his veto message admits substantially this
construction.

The proviso does not change the general provisions of the Act,
except by giving a more definite limit to the tenure-of-office,
but the last paragraph of the Act puts the whole question back
into the hands of the Senate according to the general intention
of the Act, and provides that even the Secretaries are subject to
removal by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.

The Act first provides that all persons holding civil offices at
the date of its passage appointed by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate, shall only be removed in the same manner.
This applies to the Secretary of War. This proviso merely gives a
tenure running with the term of the President and one month
thereafter, subject to removal by and with the advice and consent
of the Senate. The law clearly gives Mr. Stanton a right to the
office from the 4th of March, 1865, till one month after the 4th
of March, 1869, and he can only be disturbed in that tenure by
the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.

Yet, although Mr. Stanton was appointed by Mr. Lincoln in his
first term, when there was no tenure-of-office fixed by law, and
continued by Mr. Lincoln in his second term, it is argued that
his term expired one month after the passage of the
Tenure-of-Office Act, March 2nd, 1867, for the reason that Mr.
Lincoln's term expired at his death. This is false reasoning; the
Constitution fixed the term of the President at four years, and
by law the commencement of his term is the 4th of March. Will it
be said that when Mr. Johnson is deposed by a verdict of the
Senate, that the officer who will succeed him will serve for four
years? Certainly not. Why? Because he will have no Presidential
term, and will be merely serving out a part of the unexpired term
of Mr. Lincoln, and will go out of office on the 4th of March,
1869, at the time Mr. Lincoln would have retired by expiration of
his term, had he lived. * * *

The only question, then, which remains, is simply this: Has the
accused violated that (Tenure-of-Office) Act? No one knows better
than this accused the history of, and the purpose to be secured
by, that Act. It was ably and exhaustively discussed on both
sides, in all aspects. In the debates of Congress it was
subsequently reviewed and closely analyzed in a Veto Message of
the respondent. No portion of that Act escaped his remark, and no
practical application which has been made of it since did he fail
to anticipate. He knew before he attempted its violation that
more than three-fourths of the Representatives of the people in
Congress assembled had set their seal of disapprobation upon the
reasons given in the Veto Message and had enacted the law by more
than the constitutional number of votes required. Nay, more; he
was repeatedly warned, by investigations made looking toward just
such a proceeding as now being witnessed in this court, that the
people had instructed their Representatives to tolerate no
violation of the laws constitutionally enacted.

Mr. Groesbeck, in behalf of the defense, said in closing his
argument:

What is to be your judgment, Senators, in this case? Removal from
office and perpetual disqualification? If the President has
committed that for which he should be ejected from office it were
judicial mockery to stop short of the largest disqualifications
you can impose. It will be a heavy judgment. What is his crime in
its moral aspects, to merit such a judgment? Let us look to it.

He tried to pluck a thorn out of his very heart, for the
condition of things in the War Department, and consequently in
his Cabinet, did pain him as a thorn in his heart. You fastened
it there, and you are now asked to punish him for attempting to
extract it. What more? He made an ad interim appointment to last
for a single day. You could have terminated it whenever you saw
fit. You had only to take up the nomination which he had sent to
you, which was a good nomination, and act upon it and the ad
interim vanished like smoke. He had no idea of fastening it upon
the department. He had no intention of doing anything of that
kind. He merely proposed that for the purpose, if the opportunity
should occur, of subjecting this law to a constitutional test.
That was all the purpose it was to answer. It is all for which it
was intended. The thing was in your hands from the beginning to
the end. You had only to act upon the nomination, and the matter
was settled. Surely that was no crime.

I point you to the cases that have occurred--of ad interim
appointment after ad interim appointment; but I point especially
to the case of Mr. Holt, where the Senate in its legislative
capacity examined it, weighed it, decided upon it, heard the
report of the President and received it as satisfactory. That is,
for the purpose of this trial, before the same tribunal, res
adjudicate, I think, and it will be so regarded.

What else did he do? He talked with an officer about the law.
That is the Emory Article. He made intemperate speeches, though
full of honest, patriotic sentiments; when reviled, he should not
revile again; when smitten upon one cheek he should turn the
other.

"But," the gentleman who spoke last on the part of the managers,
"he tried to defeat pacification and restoration." I deny it in
the sense in which he presented it--that is, as a criminal act.
Here, too, he followed precedent and trod the path in which were
the footsteps of Lincoln, and which was bright with the radiance
of his divine utterance, "charity for all, malice toward none."
He was eager for pacification. He thought that the war was ended.
The drums were all silent--the arsenals were all shut; the roar
of the canon had died away to the last reverberation; the armies
were disbanded; not a single army confronted us in the field. Ah,
he was too eager, too forgiving, too kind. The hand of
conciliation was stretched out to him and he took it? It may be
he should have put it away; but was it a crime to take it?
Kindness, forgiveness a crime! Kindness a crime! Kindness is
omnipotent for good, more powerful than gunpowder or canon.
Kindness is statesmanship. Kindness is the highest statesmanship
of heaven itself. The thunders of Sinai do but terrify and
distract; alone they accomplish little; it is the kindness of
Calvary that subdues and pacifies.

What shall I say of this man? He is no theoriest; he is no
reformer; I have looked over his life. He has ever walked in
beaten paths, and by the light of, the Constitution. The mariner,
tempest-tossed in mid-sea, does not more certainly turn to his
star for guidance than does this man in trial and difficulty to
the star of the Constitution. He loves the Constitution. It has
been the study of his life. He is not learned and scholarly like
many of you; he is not a man of many ideas or of much speculation
but by a law of the mind he is only the truer to that he does
know. He is a patriot, second to no one of you in the measure of
his patriotism. He loves his country; he may be full of error; I
will not canvass now his views; but he loves his country; he has
the courage to defend it, and I believe to die for it if need be.
His courage and patriotism are not without illustration. My
colleague (Mr. Nelson) referred the other day to the scenes which
occurred in this Chamber when he alone of twenty-two Senators
remained; even his State seceded, but he remained. That was a
trial of his patriotism, of which many of you, by reason of your
locality and of your life-long associations, know nothing. How
his voice rang out in this hall in the hour of alarm for the good
cause, and in denunciation of the rebellion! But he did not
remain here; it was a pleasant, honorable, safe, and easy
position; but he was wanted for a more difficult and arduous and
perilous service. He faltered not, but entered upon it. That was
a trial of his courage and patriotism of which some of you who
now sit in judgment on more than his life, know nothing. I have,
often thought that those who, dwelt at the North, safely distant
from the collisions and strifes of the war, knew little of its
actual, trying dangers. We who lived on the border know more. Our
horizon was always red with flame; and it sometimes burned so
near us that we could feel its heat upon the outstretched hand.
But he was wanted for a greater peril, and went into the very
furnace of the war, and there served his country long and well.
Who of you have done more? Not one. * * * It seems cruel,
Senators, that he should be dragged here as a criminal, or that
any one who served his country and bore himself well and bravely
through that trying ordeal, should be condemned upon miserable
technicalities.

If he has committed any gross crime, shocking alike and
indiscriminately the entire public mind, then condemn him; but he
has rendered services to the country that entitle him to kind and
respectful consideration. He has precedents for everything he has
done, and what excellent precedents! The voices of the great dead
come to us from the grave sanctioning his course. All our past
history approves it. How can you single out this man, now in this
condition of things, and brand him before the world, put your
brand of infamy upon him because he made an ad interim
appointment for a day, and possible may have made a mistake in
attempting to remove Stanton? I can at a glance put my eye on
Senators here who would not endure the position he occupied. You
do not think it is right yourselves. You framed this civil tenure
law to give each President his own Cabinet, and yet his whole
crime is that he wants harmony and peace in his.

Senators, I will not go on. There is a great deal that is
crowding on my tongue for utterance, but it is not from my head;
it is rather from my heart; and it would be but a repetition of
the vain things 1 have been saying the past half hour But I do
hope you will not drive the President out and take possession of
his office. I hope this, not merely as counsel for Andrew
Johnson, for Andrew Johnson's administration is to me but as a
moment, and himself as nothing in comparison with the possible
consequences of such an act. No good can come of it, Senators,
and how much will the heart of the nation be refreshed if at last
the Senate of the United States can, in its judgment upon this
case, maintain its ancient dignity and high character in the
midst of storms, and passion, and strife.


A somewhat startling incident, which for the moment threatened
unpleasant results, occurred in the course of the trial. In his
opening speech for the prosecution, Mr. Manager Boutwell used
this language, speaking of the President:

The President is a man of strong will, of violent passions, of
unlimited ambition, with capacity to employ and use timid men,
adhesive, subservient men, and corrupt men, as the instruments of
his designs. It is the truth of history that he has injured every
person with whom he has had confidential relations, and many have
escaped ruin only by withdrawing from his society altogether. He
has one rule of his life: he attempts to use every man of power,
capacity, or influence within his reach. Succeeding in his
attempts, they are in time, and usually in a short time, utterly
ruined. If the considerate flee from him, if the brave and
patriotic resist his schemes or expose his plans, he attacks
them with all the energy and patronage of his office, and
pursues them with all the violence of his personal hatred. He
attacks to destroy all who will not become his instruments, and
all who become his instruments are destroyed in the use. He
spares no one. * * * Already this purpose of his life is
illustrated in the treatment of a gentleman who was of counsel
for the respondent, but who has never appeared in his behalf.


The last paragraph of the above quotation manifestly referred to
a disagrement between the President and Judge Black, which led to
the retirement of that gentleman from the Management of the
Defense of the President, a few days prior to the beginning of
the trial.

To this criticism of the President, Judge Nelson, of Counsel for
Defense, responded a few days later, with the following
statement:

It is to me, Senators, a source of much embarassment how to speak
in reply to the accusation which has thus been preferred against
the President of the United States. * * *

In order that you may understand what I have to say about it I
desire to refer the Senate to a brief statement which I have
prepared on account of the delicacy of the subject; and, although
I have not had time to write it out as I would have desired to
do, it will be sufficient to enable you to comprehend the facts
which I am about to state. You will understand, Senators, that I
do not purport to give a full history of what I may call the Alta
Vela case, as to which a report was made to the Senate by the
Secretary of State upon your call. A mere outline of the case
will be sufficient to explain what I have to say in reference to
Judge Black:

Under the guano act of 1856, William T. Kendal on the one side,
and Patterson and Marguiendo on the other, filed claims in the
Secretary of State's office to the island which is claimed by the
government of St. Domingo.

On the 17th of June, 1867, the examiner of claims submitted a
report adverse to the claim for damages against the Dominican
government. On the 22d of July, 1867, Mr. Black addressed a
letter to the President, (page 10) and another on the 7th of
August, 1867. On page 13 it is said that Patterson and Marguiendo
acquiesce in the decision. On page 13 it is shown that other
parties are in averse possession. On page 15 it is asserted that
the contest is between citizens of the United States, and can be
settled in the courts of the United States. The contest now seems
to be between Patterson and Marguiendo and Thomas B. Webster &
Co.

On the 14th of December, 1859, Judge Black, as Attorney General,
rejected the claim of W. J. Kendall to an island in the Carribean
Sea, called Cayo Verde, and Mr. Seward seems to regard the two
cases as resting on the same principle in his report of 17th of
January, 1867.

On the 22d of July, 1867, Judge Black addressed a letter to the
President enclosing a brief. On the 7th of August, 1867, he
addressed another communication to the President. On the 7th of
February, 1868, an elaborate an able communication was sent to
the President, signed by W. J. Shaffer, attorney for Patterson
and Marguiendo, and Black, Lamon &, Co., counsel, in which they
criticised with severity the report of Mr. Seward and asked the
President to review his decision.

According to the best information I can obtain, I state that ON
THE 9TH OF MARCH, 1868, General Benjamin F. Butler addressed a
letter to J. W. Shaffer, in which he stated that he was "clearly
of the opinion that, under the claim of the United States its
citizens have the exclusive right to take guano there," and that
he had never been able to understand why the executive did not
long since assert the rights of the government, and sustain the
rightful claims of its citizens to the possession of the island
IN THE MOST FORCIBLE MANNER consistent with the dignity and honor
of the Nation.

The letter was concurred in and approved of by John A. Logan, J.
A. Garfield, W. H. Koontz, J. K. Moorhead and John A. Bingham, on
the same day, 9th of March, 1868.

This letter expressing the opinion of Generals Butler, Logan and
Garfield was placed in the hands of the President by Chauncey F.
Black, who, on the 16th of March, 1868, addressed a letter to him
in which he enclosed a copy of the same with the concurrence of
Thaddeus Stevens, John A. Bingham, J. G. Blaine, J. K. Moorhead
and William H. Koontz.

After the date of this letter, and while Judge Black was the
counsel of the respondent in this cause, he had an interview with
the President, in which he urged immediate action on his part and
the sending an armed vessel to take possession of the island; and
because the President refused to do so, Judge Black, on the 19th
of March, 1868, declined to appear further as his counsel in this
case.

Such are the facts in regard to the withdrawal of Judge Black,
according to the. best information I can obtain.

The island of Alta Vela, or the claim for damages, is said to
amount in value to more than a million dollars, and it is quite
likely that an extensive speculation is on foot. I have no
reason to charge that any of the managers are engaged in it,
and presume that the letters were signed, as such communications
are often signed, by members of Congress, through the importunity
of friends.

Judge Black no doubt thought it was his duty to other clients to
press this claims but how did the President view it?

Senators, I ask you for a moment to put yourself in the place of
the President of the United States, and as this is made a matter
of railing accusation against him, to consider how the President
of the United States felt it.

There are two or three facts to which I desire to call the
attention of the Senate and the country in connection with these
recommendations. They are, first, that they were all gotten up
after this impeachment proceeding was commenced against the
President of the United States.

Another strong and powerful fact to be noticed in vindication of
the President of the United States, in reference to this case
which has been so strongly preferred against him, is that these
recommendations were signed by four of the honorable, gentlemen
to whom the House of Representatives have intrusted the duty of
managing this great impeachment against him.

Of course exception was taken to this statement, and to the
revisal inferences therefrom, and the authenticity of the
signatures mentioned at first denied, and then an effort made to
explain them away, but it is unsuccessful.

The incident left a fixed impression, at least in the minds of
many of the Senators, that an effort had been made to coerce the
President, in fear of successful impeachment, into the
perpetration of a cowardly and disgraceful international act, not
only by his then Chief of Counsel, but also by a number of his
active prosecutors on the part of the House.

It would be difficult to fittingly characterize this scandalous
effort to pervert a great State trial into an instrumentality for
the successful exploitation of a commercial venture which was by
no means free from the elements of international robbery.

Yet to Mr. Johnson's lasting credit, he proved that he possessed
the honesty and courage to dare his enemies to do their worst--he
would not smirch his own name and disgrace his country and his
great office, by using its power for the-promotion of an
enterprise not far removed from a scheme of personal plunder, let
it cost him what it might. It was a heroic act, and bravely,
unselfishly, modestly performed.



CHAPTER IX. EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES AND THEIR TESTIMONY.

The initial proceedings to the taking of testimony, while to a
degree foreshadowing a partisan division in the trial, also
demonstrated the presence of a Republican minority which could
not at all times, be depended upon to register the decrees of the
more radical portion of the body. The first development of this
fact came in the defeat of a proposition to amend the rules in
the interest of the prosecution, and again on the examination of
Mr. Burleigh, a delegate from Dakota Territory in the House of
Representatives and a witness brought by the prosecution on March
31st. Mr. Butler, examining the witness, asked the question:

Had you on the evening before seen General Thomas? * * * Had you
a communication with him?

Answer. Yes sir.

Mr. Stanbery objected, and the Chief Justice ruled that the
testimony was competent and would be heard "unless the Senate
think otherwise."

To this ruling Mr. Drake objected and appealed from the decision
of the Chair to the Senate. It appeared to be not to the ruling
per se, that Mr. Drake objected, but to the right of the Chair to
rule at all upon the admissibility of testimony. Mr. Drake
representing the extremists of the dominant side of the Chamber.
There seemed to be apprehension of the effect upon the Senate of
the absolute judicial fairness of the rulings of the Chief
Justice, and the great weight they would naturally have, coming
from so just and eminent a jurist. After discussion, Mr. Wilson
moved that the Senate retire for consultation.

The vote on this motion was a tie, being twenty-five for and
twenty-five against retiring, whereupon the Chief Justice
announced the fact of a tie and voted "yea;" and the Senate
retired to its consultation room, where, after discussion and
repeated suggestions of amendment to the rules, the following
resolution was offered by Mr. Henderson:

Resolved, That rule 7 be amended by substituting therefor the
following:

The presiding officer of the Senate shall direct all necessary
preparations in the Senate Chamber, and the presiding officer in
the trial shall direct all the forms of proceeding while the
Senate are sitting for the purpose of trying an impeachment, and
all forms during the trial not otherwise provided for. And the
presiding officer on the trial may rule all questions of of
evidence and incidental questions, which ruling shall stand as
the judgment of the Senate, unless some member of the Senate
shall ask that a formal vote be taken thereon, in which case it
shall be submitted to the Senate for decision; or he may, at his
option, in the first instance, submit any such question to a vote
of the members of the Senate.

Mr. Morrill, of Maine, moved to amend the proposed rule by
striking out the words "which ruling shall stand as the judgment
of the Senate," which was rejected without a division.

Mr. Sumner then moved to substitute the following:

That the chief justice of the United States, presiding in the
Senate on the trial of the President of the United States, is not
a member of the Senate, and has no authority under the
Constitution to vote on any question during the trial, and he
can pronounce decision only as the organ of the Senate, with its
assent.

It is not insisted here that there was any sinister purpose in
this proposition, yet the possibilities, in case of its adoption,
were very grave. Like the wasp, the sting was in the tail--"he
(the chief justice;) can pronounce decision only as the organ of
the Senate, WITH ITS ASSENT! Had that rule been adopted, suppose
the Senate, with, its vote of forty-two Republicans and twelve
Democrats, upon failure of conviction by a two-thirds vote had
refused or refrained on a party vote from giving "its assent" to
a judgment of acquittal?

The vote upon this proposed amendment was as follows:

For its adoption--Messrs. Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling,
Conness, Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Howard, Morgan, Morrill of
Maine, Morton, Nye, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart, Sumner, Thayer,
Tipton, Trumbull, Williams, Wilson--22--all Republicans.

Against its adoption--Messrs. Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Davis,
Dixon, Doolittle, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden, Fowler,
Frelinghuysen, Henderson, Hendricks, Howe, Johnson, McCreery,
Morrill of Vermont, Norton, Patterson of New Hampshire, Patterson
of Tennessee, Ross, Sherman, Sprague, Van Winkle, Vickers,
Willey--26--15 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

So the resolution was rejected--every aye vote a Republican, and
all but one, Mr. Trumbull, afterwards voting to impeach the
President at tHe close of the trial--eleven Democrats and
fifteen Republicans voting nay.

Mr. Drake then offered the following:

It is the judgment of the Senate that under the Constitution the
Chief Justice presiding over the Senate in the pending trial has
no privilege of ruling questions of law arising thereon, but that
all such questions shall be submitted to a decision by the Senate
alone.

It would be difficult to formulate a proposition better
calculated to taint the proceedings with a partisan bias than
this one by Mr. Drake. The impeachment movement was in a very
large sense, if not entirely, a partisan enterprise. It had its
origin in partisan differences, and was based mainly on
differences as to public policies at issue between the two great
parties of the country--and while it was expected that every
political. friend of the President would vote against the
impeachment, it was DEMANDED, and made a test of party fealty,
that every Republican Senator should vote for his conviction.
Therefore, and perhaps it was not illogical from these premises,
party leaders of Mr. Drake's inclination should not relish the
influence the legal, unbiased and non-partisan rulings of the
Chief Justice might have upon his more conservatively inclined
fellow partisans of the body.

Mr. Drake called for the yeas and nays, which were ordered, and
the vote was yeas 20, nays 30. The personality of this vote was
very much the same as on the previous proposition.

The rule proposed by Mr. Henderson was then adopted. The
conference closed shortly after, and the session of the Senate
was resumed.

The next day, April 1st, Mr. Sumner renewed in the Senate his
proposition submitted at the Conference the day before but not
acted upon, to change the rules of the Senate in the following
form:

It appearing from the reading of the Journal yesterday that on a
question where the Senate were equally divided, the Chief
Justice, presiding on the trial of the President, gave a casting
vote; it is hereby ordered that, in the judgment of the Senate,
such vote was without authority under the Constitution of the
United States.

The proposition was put to vote with the following result:

Yeas--Messrs. Cameron, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness, Cragin,
Drake, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morton, Norton,
Ramsay, Stewart, Sumner, Thayer, Tipton, Trumbull, Williams,
Wilson--21--10 Republicans and 1 Democrat.

Nays--Messrs. Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Corbett, Davis, Dixon,
Doolittle, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen,
Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morrill of
Vermont, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Sherman, Sprague, Van
Winkle, Vickers, Willey--26--16 Republicans and 10 Democrats.

So the proposed order was rejected. The trial then proceeded. The
answers to a very large proportion of the interrogatories
propounded to the witnesses, on both sides, were unimportant,
having very little bearing, either way, upon the case.
Twenty-eight of those interrogatories, however, were more or less
important, and were challenged, seven by the defense, and
twenty-one by the prosecution. For convenience of reference,
these interrogatories are numbered from one to twenty-eight,
inclusive, with the answers thereto, when permitted to be
answered, as follows:

Question submitted by Mr. Butler, of the prosecution, April 1st,
1868, to Mr. Walter A. Burleigh, witness on the stand, called for
the prosecution:

No. 1.

You said yesterday, in answer to my question, that you had a
conversation with General Lorenzo Thomason the evening of the
21st of February last. State if he said anything as to the means
by which he intended to obtain or was directed by the President
to obtain possession of the War Department. If so, state all he
said, as nearly as you can?

Mr. Stanbery objected.

Mr. Drake called for the yeas and nays, which were ordered, and
the vote was as follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling,
Conness, Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden,
Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Henderson, Howard, Howe, Morgan,
Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Nye, Patterson of
New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Ross, Sherman, Sprague, Stewart,
Sumner, Thayer, Tipton, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Willey, Williams,
Wilson--39--all Republicans.

Nays-Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Hendricks,
Johnson, McCreery, Norton, Patterson of Tennessee, Vickers--
11--all Democrats.

So, the Senate decided that the question should be answered.

General Butler repeated the interrogatory, and Mr. Burleigh's
answer was as follows:

On the evening of February 21st last, I learned that General
Thomas had been appointed Secretary of War ad interim, I think
while at the Metropolitan Hotel. I invited Mr. Leonard Smith, of
Leavenworth, Kas., to go with me up to his house and see him. We
took a carriage and went up. I found the General there ready to
go out with his daughters to spend the evening at some place of
amusement. I told him I would not detain him if he was going out;
but he insisted on my sitting down and I sat down for a few
moments. I told him I had learned he had been appointed Secretary
of War. He said he had; that he had been appointed that day, I
think; that after receiving his appointment from the President he
went to the War Office to show his authority, or his appoiniment,
to Secretary Stanton, and also his order to take possession of
the office; that the Secretary remarked to him that he supposed
he would give him time to remove his personal effects, or his
private papers, or something to that effect; and the answer was
"certainly." He said that in a short time the Secretary asked him
if he would give him a copy of his order, and he replied
"certainly," and gave it to him. He said that it was no more
than right to give him time to take out his personal effects. I
asked him when he was going to assume the duties of the office.
He remarked that he should take possession the next morning at
ten o'clock, which would be the 22nd; and I think in that
connection he stated that he had issued some order in regard to
the observance of the day; but of that I am not sure. I remarked
to him that I should be up at that end of the avenue the next
day, and he asked me to come in and see him. I asked him where I
could find him. and he said in the Secretary's room up stairs. I
told him I would be there. Said he, "be there punctually at 10
o'clock." Said I, "you are going to take possession to-morrow?"
"Yes." Said he, "suppose Stanton objects to it--resists?" "Well,"
said he,"I expect to meet force by force. Or use force."

Mr. Conkling: "Repeat that."

The witness. I asked him what he would do if Stanton objected, or
resisted. He said he would use force, or resort to force. Said I,
"Suppose he bars the doors?" His reply was. "I will break them
down." I think that was about all the conversation that we had
there in that connection.

No. 2.

The next disputed interrogatory put by General Butler to the
witness was:

Shortly after this conversation about which you have testified,
and after the President restored Major General Thomas to the
office of Adjutant General, if you know the fact that he was so
restored, were you present in the War Department, and did you
hear Thomas make any statements to the officers and clerks, or
either of them, belonging to the War Office, as to the rules and
orders of Mr. Stanton or of the War Office which he, Thomas,
would make, revoke, relax, or rescind, in favor of such officers
or employes when he had control of the affairs therein? If so,
state as near as you can when it was such conversation occurred,
and state all he said, as near as you can.

Mr. Howard demanded the yeas and nays and they were ordered and
were as follows:

Yeas--Anthony Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling,
Conness, Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Henderson Howard, Howe, Morgan,
Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire,
Pomeroy, Ramsey, Ross, Sprague, Stewart, Sumner, Thayer, Tipton,
Trumbull, Wilson--28--all Republicans.

Nays--Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Edmunds, Ferry,
Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson,
McCreery, Morrill of Maine, Norton, Patterson of Tennessee,
Sherman, Van Winkle, Vickers, Willey, Wilson--22--11 Republicans,
11 Democrats.

So the Senate decided that the question should be answered.

Mr. Butler: With the leave of the President, I will put this
question by portions.

Did you hear Thomas make any statement to the officers or clerks,
or either of them, belonging to the War Office, as to the rules
and orders of Mr. Stanton, or of the office, which he, Thomas,
would revoke, relax, or rescind, in favor of such officers and
employes when he had control therein?

Answer: The General remarked to me that he had made an
arrangement to have all the heads, or officers in charge of the
different departments of the office come in with their clerks
that morning, as he wanted to address them. He stated that the
rules which had been adopted for the government of the clerks by
his predecessor were of a very arbitrary character, and he
proposed to relax them. I suggested to him that perhaps I had
better go. He said, "no, not at all--remain," and I sat down and
he had some three or four officers--four or five, perhaps--come
in, and each one brought in a roomful of clerks, and he made an
address to each company as they came in, stating to them that he
did not propose to hold them strictly to the letter of the
instructions; but when they wanted to go out they could go out,
and when they wanted to come in they could come in; that he
regarded them all as gentlemen. and supposed they- would do their
duty, and he should require them to do their duty; but so far as
their little indulgences were concerned--I suppose such as going
out across the street or something of that kind--he did not
intend to interfere with them; all he expected was that they
would do their duty. I waited until he concluded, and we took a
walk, and I came away.

Mr. Samuel Wilkinson testified in response to an interrogatory by
Mr. Butler:

I asked him (Thomas) to tell me what had occurred that morning
between him and the Secretary of War in his endeavor to take
possession of the War Department. He hesitated to do so till I
told him that the town was filled with rumors of the change that
had been made, of the removal of Mr. Stanton and the appointment
of himself. He then said that since the affair had become public
he felt relieved to speak to me with freedom about it. He drew
from his pocket a copy, or rather the original, of the order of
the President of the United States, directing him to take
possession of the War Department immediately. He told me that he
had taken as a witness of his action General Williams, and had
gone up into the War Department and had shown to Edwin M. Stanton
the order of the President, and had demanded by virtue of that
order the possession of the War Department and its books and
papers. He told me that Edwin M. Stanton, after reading the
order, had asked him if he would allow him sufficient time for
him to get together his books, papers, and other personal
property and take away with him; that he told him that he would
allow to him all necessary time to do so, and had then withdrawn
from Mr. Stanton's room. He further told me, that day being
Friday, that the next day would be what he called a dies non,
being the holiday of the anniversary of Washington's birthday,
when he had directed that the War Department should be closed,
that the day thereafter would be Sunday, and that on Monday
morning he should demand possession of the War Department and of
its property, and if that demand was refused or resisted he
should apply to the General-in-Chief of the Army for a force
sufficient to enable him to take possession of the War
Department; and he added that he dd not see how the General of
the Army could refuse to obey his demand for that force. He then
added that under the order that the President had given to him he
had no election to pursue any other course than the one that he
indicated; that he was a subordinate officer directed by an order
from a superior officer, and that he must pursue that course.

Hon. T. W. Ferry, called by the Prosecution, testified from
memoranda taken down at the time of the demand of General Thomas
for possession of the War Office (Mr. Ferry being present), as
follows:

War Department
Washington, Feb. 22, 1867.

In the presence of Secretary Stanton, Judge Kelley, Morehead,
Dodge, Van Wyck, Van Horn, Delano, and Freeman Clarke, at 25
minutes past 12 m., General Thomas, Adjutant-General, came into
the Secretary of War Office, saying"Good morning," the Secretary
replying "Good morning, sir." Thomas looked around and said, "I
do not wish to disturb you gentlemen, and will wait."  Stanton
said, "Nothing private here; what do you want?" Thomas demanded
of Secretary Stanton the surrender of the Secretary of War
Office. Stanton denied it to hint, and ordered him back to his
own office as Adjutant-General. Thomas refused to go. "I claim
the office of Secretary of War, and demand it by order of the
President."

Stanton:  "I deny your authority to act, and order you back to
your own office."

Thomas: "I will stand here. I want no unpleasantness in the
presence of these gentlemen."

Stanton: "You can stand there if you please, but you can not act
as Secretary of War. I am Secretary of War. I order you out of
this office and to your own." Thomas: "I refuse to go, and will
stand here."

Stanton: "How are you to get possession? Do you intend to use
force?"

Thomas: "I do not care to use force, but my mind is made up as to
what I shall do. I want no unpleasantness, though. I shall stay
here and act as Secretary of War."

Stanton: "You shall not, and I order you, as your superior, back
to your own office."

Thomas: "I will not obey you. but will stand here and remain
here."

Stanton: "You call stand there if you please. I order you out of
this office to your own. I am Secretary of War, and your
superior."

Thomas then went into opposite room across hall (General
Schriver's) and commenced ordering General Schriver and General
Townsend. Stanton entered, followed by Moorhead and Ferry, and
ordered those generals not to obey or pay any attention to
General Thomas' orders; that he denied his assumed authority as
Secretary of War ad interim, and forbade their obedience of his
directions. "I am Secretary of War, and I now order you, General
Thomas out of this place to your own quarters."

Thomas: "I will not go, I shall discharge the functions of
Secretary of War."

Stanton: "You will not."

Thomas: "I shall require the mails of the War Department to be
delivered to me and shall transact the business of the office."

Stanton: "You shall not have them, and I order you to your room."

No. 3.

On Tuesday, April 2nd, the prosecution pmt in evidence a letter
front the President to Gen. Grant, dated Feb. 10, 1868, in answer
to a prior letter front the General. The President's letter, as
introduced in evidence, purported to contain certain enclosures
relating to the subject matter of the President's letter. The
following is that portion of the President's letter which speaks
of the enclosures accompanying and included therein:

GENERAL: The extraordinary character of your letter of the 3rd
instant would seem to preclude any reply on my part; but the
manner in which publicity has been given to the correspondence of
which that letter forms a part, and the grave questions which are
involved, induce me to take this mode of giving, as a proper
sequel to the communications which have passed between its, the
statements of the five members of the cabinet who were present on
the occasion of our conversation on the 14th ultimo. Copies of
the letters which they have addressed to me upon the subject are
accordingly herewith enclosed.

Counsel for the President objected that the letter introduced by
the prosecution was not evidence in the case unless the managers
should also produce the enclosures therein referred to and made a
part of the same. The following was the vote on sustaining the
objection:

Yeas--Bayard, Conkling, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fowler, Grimes,
Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morrill of Vermont
Norton, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Sprague, Trumbull, Van
Winkle, Vickers and Willey--20--10 Republicans and 10 Democrats.

Nays--Anthony, Buckalew, Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole,
Conness, Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden,
Frelinghuysen, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Nye,
Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Stewart,
Sumner, Thayer, Tipton, Williams, and Wilson--29--28 Republicans
and 1 Democrat.

So the evidence offered by the prosecution was admitted as
offered, without the enclosures referred to, the objection by the
defense not being sustained. (For these rejected enclosures see
appendix.)

No. 4.

The prosecution offered to prove (Mr. Geo. A. Wallace, of the
Treasury Department, on the stand):

That after the President had determined on the removal of Mr.
Stanton, Secretary of War, in spite of the action of the Senate,
there being no vacancy in the office of Assistant Secretary of
the Treasury, the President unlawfully appointed his friend and
theretofore private secretary, Edmund Cooper, to that position,
as one of the means by which he intended to defeat the tenure of
civil office act and other laws of Congress.

After debate and Mr. Wallace's answer in explanation of the
usages of the department in the disbursement of moneys, during
which it was shown that no moneys could be drawn out of the
treasury on the order of the assistant secretary except when
authorized by the Secretary of the Treasury to draw warrants
therefor, a vote was taken, and resulted as follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling,
Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of
Vermont, Nye, Pomeroy, Ramsey, Ross, Sprague, Sumner, Thayer,
Tipton and Wilson---22--all Republicans.

Nays--Bayard, Buckalew, Conness, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes,
Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morrill of Maine,
Norton, Patterson of New Hampshire, Patterson of Tennessee,
Sherman, Stewart, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, Willey and
Williams--27--16 Republicans, 11 Democrats.

So the testimony was not received, as it was shown in the debate
thereon that it would prove nothing against the President which
the prosecution had expected to prove.

No. 5.

Friday April 3rd, the Prosecution offered two telegraphic
messages, one from Lewis E. Parsons to Andrew Johnson, and the
other Mr. Johnson's answer, as follows:

Montgomery, Ala., Jan. 17, 1867.

Legislature in session. Efforts making to reconsider vote on
Constitutional Amendment. Report from Washington says it is
probable an enabling act will pass. We do not know what to
believe. I find nothing here.

(The State Legislature had previously rejected the Constitutional
Amendment.)

The response is:

U. S. Military Telegraph. Executive Office,
Washington D. C., Jan. 17, 1867.

What possible good can be obtained by reconsidering the
Constitutional Amendment? I know of none in the present posture
of affairs; and I do not believe that the people of the whole
country will sustain any set of individuals in attempts to
change the whole character of our Government by enabling acts or
otherwise. I believe, on the contrary, that they will eventually
uphold all who have patriotism and courage to stand by the
Constitution, and who place their confidence in the people. There
should be no faltering on the part of those who are honest in
their determination to sustain the several co-ordinate
Departments of the Government in accordance with its original
design.
Andrew Johnson.
Hon. L. E. Parsons, Montgomery, Alabama.


The yeas and nays were demanded by Mr. Drake, and were as
follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Cameron. Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling,
Conness, Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Henderson, Howard, Morgan,
Morrill of Vermont, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy,
Ramsay, Ross, Sherman, Sprague, Stewart, Sumner, Thayer, Tipton,
Willey, Wilson--27--all Republicans.

Nays--Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Edmunds, Ferry,
Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen,  McCreery, Morrill of Maine,
Norton, Patterson of Tennessee, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers,
Williams--17--8 Democrats and 9 Republicans.

So the testimony was decided admissible, and was claimed by Mr.
Manager Boutwell to be in substantiation of the charges contained
in the eleventh article.

No. 6.

The prosecution offered in evidence a copy of the Cleveland
Leader, a newspaper purporting to contain a speech delivered by
Mr. Johnson at the City of Cleveland, Ohio, on September 30th,
1866, as evidence against the President. It was objected to by
the defense, and on the call by Mr. Conness and Mr. Sumner the
yeas and nays were ordered, and the vote was as follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Cameron, Cattell. Chandler, Cole, Conkling,
Conness, Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden,
Frelinghuysen, Henderson, Howard, Johnson, Morgan, Morrill of
Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Norton, Nye, Patterson of New
Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Ross, Sherman, Sprague, Stewart,
Sumner, Thayer, Tipton, Van Winkle, Willey, Williams--35--33
Republicans and 2 Democrats.

Nays--Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fowler, Hendricks, Howe,
McCreery, Patterson of Tennessee, Trumbull, Vickers--11--8
Democrats and 3 Republicans.

So the evidence was received. It related to the tenth article,
and was based on a certain speech delivered by Mr. Johnson at
Cleveland, Ohio.

No. 7.

Saturday, April 10th, 1868, General Lorenzo Thomas on the stand,
called by the Defense. Mr. Stanbery asked him, with reference to
certain interviews with the President: What occurred between the
President and yourself at that second interview on the 21st
(February)?

Mr. Drake demanded the yeas and nays, and they were ordered and
were as follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cattell, Cole, Conkling,
Corbett, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden,
Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Howe,
Johnson, McCreery, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont,
Morton, Norton, Patterson of New Hampshire, Patterson of
Tennessee, Pomeroy, Ross, Sherman, Sprague, Stewart, Sumner,
Tipton, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, Willey, Williams, Wilson,
Yates--42-31 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Chandler, Conness, Cragin, Drake, Harlan, Howard,
Nye, Ramsay, Thayer--10--all Republicans.

So the testimony was received, and General Thomas' answer was:

I stated to the President that I had delivered the communication,
and that Mr. Stanton gave this answer: "Do you wish me to vacate
at once, or will you give me time to take away my private
property?" and that I replied, "At your pleasure." I then said
that after delivering the copy of the letter to him, he said: "I
do not know whether I will obey your instructions or resist
them." This I mentioned to the President. and his answer was:
"Very well, go and take charge of the office and perform the
duties." * * *

Question by Mr. Stanbery: What first happened to you the next
morning?

Answer: The first thing that happened to me the next morning was
the appearance at my house of the marshal of the district, with
an assistant marshal and a constable, and he arrested me.

Question: What time in the morning was that?

Answer: About 8 o'clock, before I had my breakfast. The command
was to appear forthwith. I asked if he would permit me to see the
President. * * * He went with me to the President's and went into
the room where the President was. I stated that I had been
arrested, at whose suit I did not know. He said. every well, that
is the place I want it inthe courts." * * * I was required to
give bail in $5,000. I asked the judge what it meant. He said it
was simply to present myself there at half past ten the following
Wednesday. I asked him if it suspended me from any of my
functions. He said, "no, it has nothing to do with them." * * * I
went immediately from there, first stopping at the President's on
my way, and stating that I had given bail. He made the same
answer, "very well, we want it in the courts."

Question: Did the President at any time prior to or including the
9th of March, authorize or direct you to use force, intimidation
or threats, to get possession of the War Office?

Answer: He did not.

No. 8.

April 11, Gen. Sherman was called by the defense. In the course
of his examination Mr. Stanbery asked him the following question:

In that interview, (referring to a previously mentioned interview
between the General and the President in the presence of Gen.
Grant) what conversation took place between the President and
you in regard to the removal of Mr. Stanton?

Mr. Butler objected and the yeas and nays were ordered.

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morgan,
Norton, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Sprague, Sumner, Trumbull,
Van Winkle, Vickers, and Willey--23--22 Republicans and 11
Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Corbett,
Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Henderson,
Howard, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont. Morton, Nye,
Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Stewart,
Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson and Yates--28--all Republicans.

So the proffered testimony was refused.

No. 9.

Counsel for defense put the following question to Gen. Sherman:

At the first interview at which the tender of the duties of the
Secretary of War ad interim was made to you by the President, did
anything further pass between you and the President in reference
to the tender or your acceptance of it?

Mr. Drake demanded the yeas and nays, and they were as follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morgan,
Norton, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Sprague, Sumner, Trumbull,
Van Winkle, Vickers, and Willey--23--12 Republicans and 11
Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Corbett,
Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinhuysen, Harlan, Henderson,
Howard, Howe, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Nye,
Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Stewart,
Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson and Yates--29--all Republicans.

So the proffered testimony was refused.

No. 10.

The next question put to Gen. Sherman by the Defense was:

In either of these conversations did the President say to you
that his object in appointing you was that he might thus get the
question of Mr. Stanton's right to the office before the Supreme
Court?

Objected to by Prosecution, and yeas and nays were taken:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Fowler, McCreery, Patterson of Tennessee,
Ross, and Vickers--7--4 Democrats, 3 Republicans.

Nays--Buckalew, Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling,
Conness, Corbett, Cragin, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Drake,
Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Harlan,
Henderson, Hendricks, Howard, Howe, Johnson, Morgan, Morrill of
Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Norton, Nye, Patterson of New
Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsey, Sherman, Sprague, Stewart, Thayer,
Tipton, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Willey, Williams, Wilson, and
Yates--44--37 Republicans and 7  Democrats.

So this proffered testimony was refused.

No. 11.

Mr. Stanbery, for Defense, suggested that the question had
undoubtedly been overruled upon matter of form, at least, and put
it again in this form.

Was anything said at either of those interviews by the President,
as to any purpose of getting the question of Mr. Stanton's right
to the office before the courts?

This was put and determined in the negative without a division,
when Mr. Henderson offered it again in this form: Did the
President, in tendering you the appointment of Secretary of War
ad interim. express the object or purpose of so doing?

Prosecution again objected, and the yeas and nays were taken:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson,
McCreery, Morrill of Maine, Morton, Norton, Patterson of
Tennessee,  Ross, Sherman, Sprague, Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle.
Vickers. and Willey-25--14 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan,
Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Vermont, Nye, Patterson of New
Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsey, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams,
Wilson, and Yates--27--all Republicans.

So the proffered evidence was refused.

No. 12.

April 13, 1868--General Sherman's examination continued:

Question: After the restoration of Mr. Stanton to office, did you
form an opinion whether the good of the service required a
Secretary of War other than Mr. Stanton; and if so, did you
communicate that opinion to the President?

Mr. Conness called for the yeas and nays and they were ordered,
and resulted:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Dixon, Doolittle. Fowler,
Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery Patterson, of Tennessee,
Ross, Trumbull, Van Winkle and Vickers--15--6 Republicans and 9
Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Davis, Drake, Edmunds, Fessenden, Frelinghuysen,
Harlan, Henderson, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine,
Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Norton, Nye, Patterson of New
Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton,
Willey, Williams, Wilson and Yates--35--33 Republicans and 2
Democrats.

So the proffered testimony was refused.

No. 13.

The next question asked of Gen. Sherman was by Senator Johnson:

Question: Did you at any time, and when, before the President
gave the order for the removal of Mr. Stanton as Secretary of
War, advise the President to appoint some other person than Mr.
Stanton?

Mr. Drake demanded the yeas and nays, which were as following:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Dixon, Doolittle, Edmunds,
Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson,
McCreery, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Trumbull, Van Winkle,
Vickers--18-9--Republicans and 9 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Dixon, Drake, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan,
Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont,
Morton, Norton, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay,
Sherman, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Willey Williams, Wilson,
Yates--33--30 Republicans and 2 Democrats.

So the proffered testimony was refused.

No. 14.

Counsel for defense offered:

A warrant of arrest of Gen. Thomas, dated February 22, 1868, and
the affidavit on which the warrant issued.

(This warrant had been issued on the affidavit of Mr. Stanton.)

The yeas and nays were as follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cattell, Cole, Corbett, Cragin,
Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen,
Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morrill of
Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Norton, Patterson of New
Hampshire, Patterson of Tennessee, Pomeroy, Ross, Sherman,
Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, Willey, Williams,
Yates--34--24 Republicans and 10 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Conkling, Chandler, Conness, Drake, Edmunds,
Ferry, Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Nye, Ramsay, Stewart,
Thayer, Tipton, Wilson--17--all Republicans.

So the warrant was received in evidence.

That warrant was issued by Judge Carter, Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court of the District of Columbia, upon the complaint of
Edwin M. Stanton, and charged Thomas with attempting forcibly to
seize and take possession of the War Office, in violation of the
fifth section of the Tenure-of-Office Act. The warrant was as
follows:

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

To David S. Gooding, United States Marshal for the District of
Columbia:

I, David K. Carter, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court for the
District of Columbia, hereby command you to arrest Lorenzo
Thomas, of said District, forthwith, and that you have the said
Lorenzo  before me at the chambers of the said Supreme Court in
the City of Washington, forthwith, to answer to the charge of a
high misdemeanor in this, that on the 21st day of February, 1868,
in the District of Columbia, he did unlawfully accept the
appointment of the office of Secretary of War ad interim, and did
then and there unlawfully hold and exercise and attempt to hold
and exercise the said office contrary to the provisions of the
act entitled "An Act regulating the tenure of certain civil
offices, passed March 2, 1867, and hereof fail not, but make due
return.

Given under my hand and seal of said court this 22nd day of
February, 1868,

D. K. Carter.
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia.

Attest: R. J. Meigs, Clerk.
(Marshal's Return).
Washington, D. C.,
February 22, 1868.

The within writ came to hand at 7 o'clock a.m. and was served by
me on the said Lorenzo Thomas at 8 o'clock a.m, and I now return
this writ and bring him before Chief Justice Carter at 9 o'clock
a. m. of to-day.

David S. Gooding,
U. S. Marshal, D. C.

No. 15.

Mr. Johnson, (of the Court,) asked this question of General
Sherman, witness on the stand: When the President tendered to you
the office of Secretary of War, ad interim, on the 27th of
January, 1868, and on the 31st of the same month and year, did
he, at the very time of making such tender, state to you what his
purpose in so doing was?

Counsel for Prosecution objected, and Mr. Drake called for the
yeas and nays, which were taken, as follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Henderson, Johnson,
McCreery, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Norton,
Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Sherman, Sumner, Trumbull, Van
Winkle, Vickers, Willey--16--16 Republicans and 10 Democrats.

Nays-Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Corbett, Cragin,
Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Nye,
Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson,
Yates--22--all Republicans.

The question was decided to be admissible, and the anawer was
"yes."

No. 16.

The next question, in immediate connection with the last, was:

If he did, state what he said his purpose was?

The yeas and nays were ordered and the vote was:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Cobertt, Davis, Dixon,
Doolittle, Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Henderson,
Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morton, Norton, Patterson of
Tennessee, Ross, Sherman, Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers,
Willey--26--15 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Cragin,
Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of
Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire,
Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart, Thayer,  Tipton, Williams, Wilson,
Yates--25--all Republicans.

So the question was permitted to be answered, and General Sherman
said:

The President told me that the relations between himself and Mr.
Stanton, and between Mr. Stanton and the other members of the
Cabinet, were such that he could not execute the office which he
filled as President of the United States without making provision
ad interim for that office; that he had the right under the law;
he claimed to have the right, and his purpose was to have the
office administered in the interest of the Army and of the
Country; and he offered me the office in that view. He did not
state to me then that his purpose was to bring it to the Courts
directly; but for the purpose of having the office administered
properly in the interest of the Army and the whole Country. I
asked him why lawyers could not make a case, and not bring me, or
any ofcer of the Army, into the controversy. His answer was that
it was found impossible, or a case could not be made up; but,
said he "if we can bring the case to the Courts, it would not
stand half an hour."

Mr. Butler, of the Prosecution, objected, and after debate,
General Sherman continued:

The question first asked me seemed to restrict me so close to the
purpose that I endeavored to confine myself to that point alone.
On the first day, or first interview, in which the President
offered me the appointment ad interim, he confined himself to
very general terms, and I gave him no definite answer. The second
interview, which was on the afternoon of the 30th, was the
interview during which he made the points which 1 have testified
to. In speaking he referred to the constitutionality of the bill
known as the civil tenure-of-office bill, I think, or the tenure
of civil office bill; and it was the constitutionality of that
bill which he seemed desirous of having tested, and which, he
said, if it could be brought before the Supreme Court properly,
would not stand half an hour. We also spoke of force. I first
stated that if Mr. Stanton would simply retire, although it was
against my interest, against my desire, against my personal
wishes, and against my official wishes, I might be willing to
undertake to administer the office ad interim. Then he supposed
the point was yielded; and I made this point? "Suppose Mr.
Stanton do not yield?" he answered, "Oh! he will make no
objection; you present the order and he will retire." I expressed
my doubt, and he remarked. "I know him better than you do: he is
cowardly." I then begged to be excused from giving him an answer
to give the subject more reflection, and I gave him my final
answer in writing. I think that letter, if you insist on knowing
my views, should come into evidence, and not parol testimony
taken up; but my reasons for declining the office were mostly
personal in their nature.

Mr. Henderson (of the Court) asked this question:

Did the President, on either of the occasions alluded to, express
to you a fixed purpose or determination to remove Mr. Stanton
from his office?

General Sherman answered:

If by removal is meant a removal by force, he never conveyed to
my mind such an impression; but he did most unmistakably say that
he could have no more intercourse with him in the relation of
President and Secretary of War.

Mr. Howard (of the Court) asked the General:

You say the President spoke of force. What did he say about
force?

General Sherman answered:

I enquired, "Suppose Mr. Stanton do not yield? What then shall be
done?" "Oh," said he, "there is no necessity of considering that
question. Upon the presentation of an order he will simply go
away, or retire.

Mr. Henderson (of the Court) asked the question:

Did you give any opinion, or advice to the President on either of
those occasions in regard to the legality or propriety of an ad
interim appointment; and if so, what advice did you give, or what
opinion did you express to him?

Mr. Bingham of the prosecution, objected, and the Chair put the
question to the Senate whether it should be answered. The Senate,
without a division, refused answer to the question, and the
examination of Gen. Sherman closed for that day.

No. 17.

Wednesday, April 15th. The defense offered several extracts from
records of the Navy Department, to prove the practice of the
Government in cases of removal from office by different
Presidents prior to Mr. Johnson. of which the following are
samples:

NAVY AGENCY AT NEW YORK.

1861. June 20. Isaac Henderson was, by direction of the
President, removed from the office of Navy agent at New York, and
instructed to transfer to Paymaster John D. Gibson, of United
States Navy, all the public funds and other property in his
charge. Navy Agency at Philadelphia.

Dec. 26, 1851. James S. Chambers was removed from the office of
Navy Agent at Philadelphia and instructed to transfer to
Paymaster A. E. Watson, U. S. Navy, all the public funds and
other property in his charge.

The prosecution objected and the yeas and nays were ordered.

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Conkling, Corbett, Davis,
Dixon, Doolittle, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden, Fowler,
Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Howe, Johnson,
McCreery, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Patterson
of New Hampshire, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbery,
Sherman, Stewart, Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, Willey,
Wilson, Yates--36--25 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conness, Cragin, Drake, Harlan,
Howard, Morgan, Nye, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Thayer, Tipton,
Williams--15--all Republicans.

So the evidence was admitted.

No. 18.

Thursday, April 16, Mr. Walter S. Cox on the stand. The defense
offered to prove:

That Mr. Cox was employed professionally by the President. in the
presence of General Thomas, to take such legal proceedings in the
case that had been commenced against General Thomas as would be
effectual to raise judicially the question of Mr. Stanton's legal
right to continue to hold the office of Secretary for the
Department of War against the authority of the President, and
also in reference to obtaining a writ of quo warranto for the
same purpose; and we shall expect to follow up this proof by
evidence of what was done by the witness in pursuance of the
above employment.

Mr. Drake demanded the yeas and nays, and they were ordered:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Corbett, Davis, Dixon,
Doolittle, Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Hendricks,
Howe, Johnson, McCreery, Morrill of Maine, Morton, Norton,
Patterson of New Hampshire, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross,
Saulsbury, Sherman, Sprague, Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle,
Vickers, Willey--29--17 Republicans and 12 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Cragin, Drake,
Edmunds, Ferry, Harlan, Howard, Morgan, Morrill of Vermont, Nye,
Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson,
Yates--21--all Republicans.

So the testimony was received, and the witness proceeded to
detail the steps he had taken by direction of the President to
procure a judicial determination of General Thomas' right to the
office of Secretary of War and to put him in possession, till
the following question was asked.

No. 19.

What did you do toward getting out a writ of habeas corpus under
the employment of the President.

Prosecution objected, and the yeas and nays were ordered:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson,
McCreery, Morrill of Maine, Morgan, Norton, Patterson of New
Hampshire, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury, Sherman,
Sprague, Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, Willey--27--15
Republicans and 12 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Cragin,
Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of
Vermont, Nye, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams,
Wilson, Yates--23--all Republicans.

The Senate having decided the evidence to be admissible,

Mr. Cox proceeded:

When the Chief Justice announced that he would proceed as an
examining Judge to investigate the case of General Thomas, and
not as holding Court, our first application to him was to adjourn
the investigation into the Criminal Court then in session, in
order to have the action of that Court. After some little
discussion this request was refused. Our next effort was to have
General Thomas committed to prison, in order that we might apply
to that Court for a habeas corpus, and upon his being remanded by
that Court; if that should be done, we might follow up the
application by one to the Supreme Court of the United States. * *
* The Chief Justice having indicated an intention to postpone
the examination, we directed General Thomas to decline giving any
bail for further appearance, and to surrender himself into
custody, and announce to the Judge that he was in custody, and
then present to the Criminal Court an application for a writ of
habeas corpus. The Counsel on the other side objected that
General Thomas could not put himself into custody, and they did
not desire that he should be detained in custody. The Chief Judge
also declared that he would not restrain General Thomas of his
liberty, and would not hold him or allow him to be held in
custody. Supposing that he must be either committed or finally
discharged, we then claimed that he be discharged, not supposing
that the Counsel on the other side would consent to it, and
supposing that would bring about his commitment, and that we
should then have an opportunity of getting a habeas corpus. They
made no objection, however, to his final discharge, and
accordingly the Chief Justice did discharge him.

No. 20.

The witness, Mr. Cox, was asked by counsel for defense:

After you had reported to the President the result of your
efforts to obtain a writ of habeas corpus, did you do any other
act in pursuance of the original instructions you had received
from the President on Saturday to test the right of Mr. Stanton
to continue in the office; and if so, state what the acts were?

The yeas and nays were ordered on the demand of Mr. Howard.

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Hendricks, Howe, Johnson, McCreery,
Morrill of Maine, Morton, Norton, Patterson of New Hampshire,
Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbery, Sherman, Sprague,
Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, Willey--27--15 Republicans
and 12 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Cragin,
Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard, Morgan,
Morrill of Vermont, Nye, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart, Thayer,
Tipton, Williams, Wilson, Yates--23--all Republicans.

So the evidence was admitted, and Mr. Cox continued.

On the same day or the next, I prepared an information in the
nature of a quo warranto. I think a delay of one day occurred in
the effort to procure certified copies of Gen. Thomas' commission
as Secretary of War ad interim, and of the order to Mr. Stanton.
I then applied to the District Attorney to sign the information
in the nature of a quo warranto, and he declined to do so without
instructions or a request from the President or the Attorney
General. This fact was communicated to the Attorney General and
the papers were sent to him. Nothing was done after this time by
me.

No. 21.

The defense offered to prove:

That the President then stated that he had issued an order for
the removal of Mr. Stanton and the employment of Mr. Thomas to
perform the duties ad interim; that thereupon Mr. Perrin said,
"Supposing Mr. Stanton should oppose the order." The President
replied: "There is no danger of that, for General Thomas is
already in the office." He then added: "It is only a temporary
arrangement; I shall send in to the Senate at once a good name
for the office.

Mr. Butler, for prosecution, objected, and the vote was:

Yeas--Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Hendricks,
McCreery, Patterson of Tennessee, and Vickers--9--all Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Corbett,
Cragin, Drake, Ferry, Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes,
Harlan, Howard, Howe, Johnson, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill
of Vermont,  Morton, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy,
Ramsay, Ross, Sherman, Sprague, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton,
Trumbull, Van Winkle, Willey, Williams, Wilson, and
Yates---37--36 Republicans and 1 Democrat.

So this testimony was rejected.

No. 22.

Friday, April 17. The defense offered to prove:

That on this occasion (a Cabinet meeting previously mentioned),
the President communicated to Mr. Welles, and the other members
of his Cabinet, before the meeting broke up, that he had removed
Mr. Stanton and appointed General Thomas Secretary of War ad
interim; and that, upon the inquiry by Mr. Welles whether General
Thomas was in possession of the office, the President replied
that he was, and on further question of Welles, whether Mr.
Stanton acquiesced, the President replied that he did; all that
he required was time to remove his papers.

Mr. Butler objected and the yeas and nays were ordered.

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Conkling, Corbett, Davis,
Dixon, Doolittle, Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson,
McCreery, Morton, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbery,
Sherman, Sprague, Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers,
Willey--26--15 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Conness, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry,
Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine,
Morrill of Vermont, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay,
Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson, Yates--2-3-all
Republicans.

So the testimony was received, and the following proceeding was
had Mr. Evarts, of Counsel for the President. Mr. Welles on the
stand:

Please state, Mr. Welles, what communication was made by the
President to the Cabinet on the subject of the removal of Mr.
Stanton and the appointment of General Thomas, and what passed at
the time?

Mr. Welles: As I remarked, after the Departmental business had
been disposed of, the President remarked, as usual when he had
anything to communicate himself, that before they separated it
would be proper for him to say that he had removed Mr. Stanton
and appointed the Adjutant General Lorenzo Thomas, Secretary ad
interim. I asked whether General Thomas was in possession. The
President said he was; that Mr. Stanton required some little time
to remove his writings, his papers; I said, perhaps, or I asked,
"Mr. Stanton, then, acquiesces?" He said he did, as he considered
it. * * *

Question: Now, sir, one moment to a matter which you spoke of
incidentally. You were there the next morning about noon?

Answer: I was.

 Question: Did you then see the appointment of Mr. Ewing?

Answer: I did.

Question: Was it made out before you came there, or after, or
while you were there?

Answer: While I was there.

Question: And you then saw it?

Answer: I saw it.

Question by Mr. Johnson (of the Court): What time of the day was
that?

Answer: It was about twelve.

* * * Question by Mr. Evarts: Did you become aware of the
Tenure-of-office bill, as it is called, at or about the time that
it passed Congress?

Answer: I was aware of it.

Question: Were you present at any Cabinet meeting at which, after
the passage of that Act, it became the subject of consideration?

Answer: Yes, on two occasions. The first occasion when it was
brought before the Cabinet was on the 26th of February, 1867.

Question: Who were present?

Answer: All the Cabinet were present.

Question: Was Mr. Stanton there?

Answer: Mr. Stanton was there, I think, on that occasion.

Question: This civil tenure act was the subject of consideration
there?

Answer: It was submitted.

Question: As a matter of consideration in the Cabinet?

Answer: For consultation for the advice and opinion of members.

Question: How did he submit the matter to your consideration?

Mr. Butler objected and demanded that the offer be put in
writing.

No. 23.

That the President at a meeting of the Cabinet, while the bill
was before the President for his approval, laid before the
Cabinet the tenure-of-civil-office bill for their consideration
and advice to the President respecting his approval of the bill:
and thereupon the members of the Cabinet then present gave their
advice to the President that the bill was unconstitutional and
should be returned to Congress with his objections, and that the
duty of preparing a message, setting forth the objections to the
constitutionality of the bill, was devolved on Mr. Seward and Mr.
Stanton; to be followed by proof as to what was done by the
President and Cabinet up to the time of sending in the message.

After argument the yeas and nays were taken:

Yeas--Anthony Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson,
McCreery, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury, Trumbull, Van
Winkle, Vickers, and Willey--20--9 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan,
Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont,
Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay Sherman, Sprague,
Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson, and Yates--29--all
Republicans.

So this testimony was rejected.

No. 21.

Counsel for Defense offered to prove:

That at the meetings of the Cabinet at which Mr. Stanton was
present, held while the tenure-of-civil-office bill was before
the President for approval, the advice of the Cabinet in regard
to the same was asked by the President and given by the Cabinet,
and thereupon the question whether Mr. Stanton and the other
Secretaries who had received their appointment from Mr. Lincoln
were within the restrictions upon the President's power of
removal from office created by said act was considered, and the
opinion expressed that the Secretaries appointed by Mr. Lincoln
were not within such restrictions.

The yeas and nays were ordered, and the vote was:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson,
McCreery, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury, Sherman,
Sprague, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, and Willey--22--11
Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole. Conness. Corbett, Cragin,
Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghusen, Harlan, Howard, Howe,
Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Patterson of New
Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams,
Wilson, and Yates--26--all Republicans.

So this testimony was rejected.

No. 25.

Counsel for defense offered to prove:

That at the Cabinet meetings between the passage of the
tenure-of-civil office bill and the order of the 21st of
February, 1868, for the removal of Mr. Stanton. upon occasions
when the condition of the public service, as affected by the
operation of that bill, came up for the consideration and advice
of the Cabinet, it was considered by the President and Cabinet
that a proper regard to the public service made it desirable that
upon some proper case a judicial determination of the
constitutionality of the law should be obtained.

The question being taken by yeas and nays, resulted:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson,
McCreery, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury Trumbull, Van
Winkle, and Vickers--19--8 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan,
Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont,
Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Sprague,
Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Willey, Williams, Wilson and
Yates--30--all Republicans.

So the proffered testimony was rejected.

No. 26.

Counsel for defense put this question to witness, (Mr. Welles,
then Secretary of the Navy.)

Was there, within the period embraced in the inquiry in the last
question, and at any discussions or deliberations of the Cabinet
concerning the operation of the tenure-of-civil-office act and
the requirements of the public service in regard to the service,
any suggestion or intimation whatever touching or looking to the
vacation of any office by force or getting possession of the same
by force?

Counsel for prosecution objected, and the vote was:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Edmunds,
Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery,
Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury, Trumbull, Van Winkle,
and Vickers--18--8 Republicans and 10 Democrats.

Nay-s-Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness, Corbett,
Cragin, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan,
Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Patterson of New Hampshire,
Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Willey,
Williams, Wilson, and Yates--26--all Republicans.

So the proffered testimony was rejected.

No. 27.

Defense offered to prove:

That at the meetings of the Cabinet at which Stanton was present,
held while the tenure-of-civil-office bill was before the
President for approval, the advice of the Cabinet in regard to
the same was asked by the President, and given the Cabinet, and
thereupon the question whether Mr. Stanton and the other
Secretaries who had received their appointments from  Mr. Lincoln
were within the restrictions upon the President's power of
removal from office created by said act, was considered and the
opinion expressed that the Secretaries appointed by Mr. Lincoln
were not within such restrictions.

Mr. Johnson: I ask that the question propounded by the Senator
from Ohio (Mr. Sherman) shall now be read.

The Secretary read the question as follows:

State if, after the 2d of March, 1867, the date of the passage of
the tenure-of-office act, the question whether the Secretaries
appointed by President Lincoln were included within the
provisions of that act came before the Cabinet for discussion;
and if so, what opinion was given on this question by members of
the Cabinet to the President.

The yeas and nays were ordered; and being taken resulted:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery,
Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury, Sherman, Trumbull, Van
Winkle, Vickers, and Willey--20--9 Republican and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard,
Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Patterson of
New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton,
Williams, Wilson, and Yates--26--all Republicans.

So the proffered testimony was rejected.

No. 28.

The Prosecution proposed to put in evidence the nomination of
Lieutenant General Sherman, to be General by brevet, sent to the
Senate on the 13th of February, 1868, also the nomination of
Major General George H. Thomas to be Lieutenant General by
brevet, and to be General by brevet, sent to the Senate on the
21st of February, 1868.

The question being taken by yeas and nays, resulted:
Yeas--Anthony, Cole, Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Henderson,
Morton, Ross, Sumner, Tipton, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Willey, and
Yates--14--all Republicans.

Nays--Buckalew, Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry,
Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Hendricks, Howard, Howe, Johnson,
McCreery, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Patterson
of New Hampshire, Patterson of Tennessee, Pomeroy, Ramsay,
Sherman, Sprague, Stewart, Thayer, Vickers, Williams, and
Wilson--35--26 Republicans and 9 Democrats.

So the proffered testimony was refused.

GENERAL EMORY'S TESTIMONY.

The Ninth Article of the Impeachment was based upon alleged
military changes in the City of Washington whereby the number of
troops on duty there was rumored to have been largely increased,
with a view to their use in the controversy between the President
and Congress, and more especially for the expulsion of Mr.
Stanton from the War Office in case of his resistance to the
order of the President for his retirement. The wildest rumors of
that character prevailed--that Mr. Johnson proposed to throw off
all disguise and assume direct military control and the
establishment of practically a military dictatorship. Congress
had some months previously enacted that all military orders from
the President should be issued through the General of the
Army--the Congress thereby assuming to practically abrogate a
constitutional function of the Chief Executive.

There was considerable confidence among the supporters of the
impeachment that they would be able to prove these allegations by
General Emory, then in local command of the troops and Department
of Washington. General Emory was called by the prosecution, and
the following was his testimony.

Examined by Mr. Butler:

Question: Will you have the kindness to state, as nearly as you
can what took place then? (Referring to an interview with the
President at the Executive Mansion.)

Answer: I will try and state the substance of it, but the words I
can not undertake to state exactly. The President asked me if I
recollected a conversation he had had with me when I first took
command of the department. I told him that I recollected the
facts of the conversation distinctly. He then asked me what
changes had been made. I told him no material changes, but such
as had been made I could state at once. I went on to state that
in the fall six companies of the 29th infantry had been brought
to this City to winter; but as an offset to that, four companies
of the 12th infantry had been detached to South Carolina on the
request of the Commander of that District; that two companies of
artillery had been detached by my predecessor, one of them for
the purpose of siding in putting down the Fenian difficulties,
had been returned to the command, that although the number of
companies head been increased, the numerical strength of the
command was very much the same, growing out of an order reducing
the artillery and infantry companies from the maximum of the war
establishment to the minimum of the peace establishment. The
President said: "I do not refer to those changes." I replied that
if he would state what changes he referred to, or who made the
report of the changes, perhaps I could be more, explicit. He
said, "I refer to recent changes within a day or two," or
something to that effect. I told him I thought I could assure him
that no changes had been made; that under a recent order issued
for the government of the armies of the United States, founded
upon a law of Congress, all orders had to be transmitted through
General Grant to the army, and in like manner all orders coming
from General Grant to any of his subordinate officers must
necessarily come, if in my department, through me; that if by
chance an order had been given to any junior officer of mine it
was his duty at once to report that fact. The President asked me.
"What order do you refer to?" I replied, "To order number 17 of
the series of 1867." He said, "I would like to see the order,"
and a messenger was dispatched for it. At this time a gentleman
came in who I supposed had business in no way connected with the
business I had in hand, and I withdrew to the farther end of the
room, and while there, the messenger came in with the book of
orders and handed it to me. As soon as the gentleman had
withdrawn, I returned to the President with the book in my hand,
and said I would take it as a favor if he would permit me to call
his attention to that order; that it had been passed in an
appropriation bill, and I thought it not unlikely that it had
escaped his attention. He took the order and read it, and
observed, "This is not in conformity with the Constitution of the
United States, that makes me Commander-in-Chief, or with the
terns of your commission." I replied, "That is the order which
you approved and issued to the army for our government," or
something to that effect. I can not recollect the exact words,
nor do I intend to quote the exact words of the President. He
said, "Am I to understand that the President of the United States
can not give an order except through the General of the Army? Or
General Grant?" I said in reply, that that was my
impression--that that was the opinion that the Army entertain,
and I thought upon that subject they were a unit. I also said, "I
think it is fair, Mr. President, to say to you that when this
order came out, there was considerable discussion on the subject
as to what were the obligations of an officer under that order,
and some eminent lawyers were consulted. I myself consulted
one--and the opinion was given to me decidedly and unequivocally
that we were bound by the order, Constitutional or not
Constitutional. The President observed that "the object of the
law was evident."

The following is that portion of the act referred to:

"Section 2. Be it further enacted: That the headquarters of the
General of the Army of the United States shall be at the City of
Washington, and all orders and instructions relating to military
operations issued by the President and Secretary of War shall be
issued through the General of the Army, and in case of his
inability, through the next in rank. The General of the, Army
shall not be removed, suspended, or relieved from command or
assigned to duty elsewhere than at said headquarters except at
his own request WITHOUT THE PREVIOUS APPROVAL OF THE SENATE; and
any orders or instructions relating to Military operations issued
contrary to the requirements of this section, shall be null and
void. And any officer who shall issue orders or instructions,
contrary to the provisions of this section, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor in office; and any officer of the Army
who shall transmit, convey or obey any orders or instructions so
issued contrary to the provisions of this section, knowing that
such orders were so issued shall be liable to imprisonment for
not less than two nor more than twenty years upon conviction
thereof in any Court of competent jurisdiction."

By turning to the Congressional Record of that day, it will be
found that Mr. Johnson was perfectly aware of the existence of
the foregoing provision of the Act of Congress in the bill
referred to, at the time he returned the bill to the House with
his signature. His reasons for so signing it are set out in the
following communication to the House accompanying the bill

The act entitled "An act making appropriations for the support of
the Army for the year ending June 30, 1868, and for other
purposes," contains provisions to which I must call attention.
There are propositions contained in the second section which in
certain cases deprives the President of his Constitutional
functions of Commander in Chief of the Army, and in the sixth
section, which denies to ten States of the Union their
Constitutional right to protect themselves in any emergency, by
means of their own militia. These provisions are out of place in
an appropriation act, but I am compelled to defeat these
necessary appropriations if I withhold my signature from the act.
Pressed by these considerations, I feel constrained to return the
bill with my signature, but to accompany it with my earnest
protest against the section which I have indicated.

Andrew Johnson.
Washington, D. C., March 2, 1868.


That Congress was to expire by limitation at 12 o'clock on the
4th, thirty-six hours later. If Mr. Johnson had vetoed the bill,
as under ordinary conditions it would have been his duty to the
Constitution and to himself to do, its re-passage through the two
Houses in that limited time would have been impossible, and the
appropriations carried by the bill for the support of the Army
would have been lost. To save them Mr. Johnson submitted to the
indignity put upon him by Congress in denying him a guaranteed
and manifest Constitutional right and power. In that act Mr.
Johnson illustrated a magnanimity and a consciousness of public
responsibility that was most creditible to himself, and in marked
contrast to the action of Congress toward him.



CHAPTER X. A CONFERENCE HELD AND THE FIRST VOTE TAKEN.

A few days prior to the day set for taking the vote on the
several Articles of Impeachment, and after the conclusion of
testimony, it was proposed that there be a private session for
conference of the Senate on a day named, May 11th, to give
Senators an opportunity to declare themselves on the pending
impeachment.

Neither the precise object or the utility of a conference were
then apparent, but the result was somewhat of a surprise to those
who had, up to that time, been undoubtingly confident of the
President's conviction. Comparatively few Senators had previously
declared their position. Very few, if any of the Republican
Senators had indicated a disposition to vote against any of the
articles, but the silence of a number of them, and their refusal
to commit themselves even to their associates, was a source of
uneasiness in Senatorial Impeachment circles. Hence, possibly,
the suggestion of a "conference."

It was taken for granted that every Democratic Senator would vote
against the impeachment. But the idea was not to be entertained
that the "no" votes would extend beyond the Democratic coterie of
twelve. There were, however, anxious misgivings as to that. There
was too much silence--too much of saying nothing when so little
that might be said would go so far to relieve an oppressive
anxiety.

So a session for "conference" was ordered and held, much to the
surprise of gentlemen whose silence had become somewhat
oppressive, and was becoming equally painful to those who wanted
a conference." It savored of an attempt to "poll the Senate" in
advance of judgment. It was resolved at the session of May 7th,
to hold a session for deliberation on the following Monday, May
11th. The most surprising development of that session was the
weakness of the bill of indictment at the very point where it was
apparently strongest--the first Article. Two conspicuous and
influential Senators--Messrs. Sherman of Ohio, and Howe of
Wisconsin--declared, and gave convincing reasons therefor, that
they would not vote for the impeachment of Mr. Johnson on that
Article.

In his remarks on this occasion, after giving a history of the
enactment of the Tenure-of-Office law, the first section of which
specifically excepts from its operation such members of Mr.
Johnson's Cabinet as had been appointed by Mr. Lincoln and still
remaining, though not recommissioned by Mr. Johnson, Mr. Sherman
said:

I can only say as one of the Senate conferees, under the solemn
obligations that now rest upon us in construing this Act, that I
did not understand it to include members of the Cabinet not
appointed by the President, and that it was with extreme
reluctance and only to secure the passage of the bill that, in
the face of the votes of the Senate I agreed to the report
LIMITING AT ALL the power of the President to remove heads of
Departments. * * * I stated explicitly that the Act as reported
did not protect from removal the members of the Cabinet appointed
by Mr. Lincoln, that President Johnson might remove them at his
pleasure; and I named the Secretary of war as one that might be
removed. * * * I could not conceive a case where the Senate would
require the President to perform his great executive office upon
the advice and through heads of Departments personally obnoxious
to him, and whom he had not appointed, and, therefore, no such
case was provided for. * * * Can I pronounce the President guilty
of crime, and by that vote aid to remove him from his high office
for doing what I declared and still believe he had a legal right
to do. God forbid: * * * What the President did do in the removal
of Mr. Stanton he did under a power which you repeatedly refused
to take from the office of the President--a power that has been
held by that officer since the formation of the Government. and
is now limited only by the words of an Act, the literal
construction of which does not include Mr. Stanton. * * * It
follows, that as Mr. Stanton is not protected by the
Tenure-of-Civil-Office Act, his removal rests upon the Act of
1789, and he according to the terms of that Act and of the
commission held by him, and in compliance with the numerous
precedents cited in this cause, was lawfully removed by the
President, and his removal not being contrary to the provisions
of the Act of March 2nd 1867, the 1st, 4th, 5th, and 6th
Articles, based upon his removal, must fail.

On this point, Mr. Howe said:

If Mr. Stanton had been appointed during the present Presidential
term. I should have no doubt he was within the security of the
law. But I cannot find that, either in fact or in legal
intendment, he was appointed during the present Presidential
term. It is urged that he was appointed by Mr. Lincoln, and such
is the fact. It is said that Mr. Lincoln's term is not yet
expired. Such I believe to be the fact. But the language of the
proviso is, that a Secretary shall hold not during the term of
MAN by whom he is appointed, but during the TERM of the PRESIDENT
by whom he may be appointed. Mr. Stanton was appointed by the
President in 1862. The term of that President was limited by the
Constitution. It expired on the 4th of March, 1865. That the same
incumbent was re-elected for the next term is conceded, but I do
not comprehend how that fact extended the former term.

Entertaining these views, and because the first Article of the
Impeachment charges the order of removal as a violation of the
Tenure-of-Office Act, I am constrained to hold the President not
guilty upon that Article.

These declarations, coming from two gentlemen of distinction and
influence in the party councils, both of whom Had actively
participated in framing the Tenure-of-Office Act, became at once
the occasion of genuine and profound surprise, and it is
unnecessary to say that they tended largely to strengthen the
doubts entertained by others as to the sufficiency of all the
other allegations of the indictment. They naturally and logically
reasoned that the removal of Mr. Stanton, set out in the first
Article, constituted, in effect, the essence of the indictment,
and that all that followed, (save the 10th Article was more in
the nature of specifications, or a bill of particulars, than
otherwise--that if no impeachable offense were set out in the
first Article, then none was committed, as that Article
constituted the substructure of all the rest--its essence and
logic running through and permeating practically all--and that
without that Article, there was no coherence or force in any of
them, and consequently nothing charged against the President that
was impeachable, as he had not violated the Tenure-of-Office law,
and was not charged with the violation of any other law.

That conference developed, further, that a large majority of the
Articles of Impeachment were objectionable to and would not be
supported by a number of Republican Senators.

Mr. Edmunds would not support the 4th, 8th, 9th, and 10th
Articles, being "wholly unsustained by proof," but would support
the 11th, though apparently doubtful of its efficiency.

Mr. Ferry could not support the 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 9th, or 10th
Articles.

Mr. Howard declared that he would not support the 9th Article.

Mr. Morrill of Vermont, would not support the 4th, 6th, 9th, or
10th Articles, as they were unproven.

Mr. Morrill, of Maine, Mr. Yates, Mr. Harlan, and Mr. Stewart,
would vote to convict on the Articles relating to the removal of
Mr. Stanton--uncommitted on all others.

Mr. Fessenden, Mr. Fowler, Mr. Grimes, Mr. Henderson, Mr.
Trumbull, and Mr. Van Winkle, each declared, at that conference,
their opposition to the entire list of the Articles of
Impeachment.

But eighteen Republicans committed themselves at that conference,
for conviction, out of twenty-four who filed opinions. While it
was taken for granted that the six Democrats who had failed to
declare their position at that conference would oppose
conviction, the position of the eighteen Republicans who had
failed to declare themselves became at once a source of very
grave concern in impeachment circles. Out of that list of
eighteen uncommitted Republicans, but one vote was necessary to
defeat the impeachment. This condition was still farther
intensified by the fact that eight of the eleven Articles of
Impeachment were already beaten in that conference, and
practically by Republican committals, and among them the head and
front and foundation of the indictment--the First Article--by
Messrs. Sherman and Howe, two conspicuous Republican leaders.

A forecast of the vote based on these committals as to the
several Articles, would be against the First Article, twelve
Democrats and eight Republicans, one more than necessary for its
defeat--the eight "not guilty" votes including Messrs. Sherman
and Howe.

Against the Fourth Article--twelve Democrats and nine
Republicans--including Messrs. Edmunds, Ferry, and Morrill of
Vermont.

Against the Fifth Article--twelve Democrats and eight
Republicans-including Messrs. Edmunds and Ferry.

Against the Sixth Article--twelve Democrats and nine
Republicans-including Messrs. Ferry, Howe, and Morrill of
Vermont.

Against the Seventh--Article-twelve Democrats and seven
Republicans--including Mr. Ferry.

Against the Eighth Article--twelve Democrats and seven
Republicans--including Mr. Edmunds.

Against the Ninth Article--twelve Democrats and twelve
Republicans--including Messrs. Sherman, Edmunds, Ferry, Howe,
Howard, and Morrill of Vermont.

Against the Tenth Article--twelve Democrats and ten
Republicans--including Messrs. Edmunds, Sherman, Ferry, and
Morrill of Vermont.

It is somewhat conspicuous that but three gentlemen--Messrs.
Sumner, Pomeroy, and Tipton, in their arguments in the
Conference, pronounced the President guilty on all the
charges--though five others, Messrs. Wilson, Patterson of New
Hampshire, Frelinghuysen, Cattell, and Williams, pronounced the
President guilty on general principles, without specification;
and Messrs. Morrill of Maine, Yates and Stewart, guilty in the
removal of Mr. Stanton, without further specification of charges.

As but one vote, in addition to the twelve Democratic and the six
Republican votes pledged against conviction at the Conference,
was necessary to defeat impeachment on the three remaining
Articles--the 2nd, 3rd, and 11th--and as nearly a half of the
Republicans of the Senate had failed to commit themselves, at
least in any public way, the anxiety of the advocates of
Impeachment became at once, and naturally, very grave. How many
of the eighteen Republicans who had failed to declare themselves
at that Conference might fail to sustain the Impeachment, became,
therefore, a matter of active solicitude on all sides, especially
in impeachment circles in and out of the Senate. Republican
committals in the Conference had rendered absolutely certain the
defeat of every Article of the Impeachment except the Second,
Third, and Eleventh, and the addition of but a single vote from
the eighteen uncommitted Republicans to the "No" side, would
defeat them.

It was under this unfavorable condition of the Impeachment cause,
that the Senate assembled on May 16th, 1868, for the purpose of
taking final action on the indictment brought by the House of
Representatives, the trial of which had occupied the most of the
time of the Senate for the previous three months, and which had
to a large degree engrossed the attention of the general public,
to the interruption of legislation pending in the two Houses of
Congress, and more or less to the embarrassment of the commercial
activities of the country.

For the first time in the history of the government, practically
eighty years, the President of the United States was at the bar
of the Senate, by virtue of a constitutional warrant, on an
accusation of the House of Representatives of high crimes and
misdemeanors in office, and his conviction and expulsion from
office demanded in the name of all the people. No event in the
civil history of the country had ever before occurred to so
arouse public antipathies and public indignation against any
man-and these conditions found special vent in the City of
Washington, as the Capitol of the Nation, as it had become during
the trial the focal point of the politically dissatisfied element
of the entire country. Its streets and all its places of
gathering had swarmed for many weeks with representatives of
every State of the Union, demanding in a practically united voice
the deposition of the President.

On numbers of occasions during the previous history of the
Government there had been heated controversies between the
Congress and the Executive, but never before characterized by the
intensity, not infrequently malevolence, that had come to mark
this and never before had a division between the Executive and
the Congress reached a point at which a suggestion of his
constitutional ostracism from office had been seriously
entertained, much less attempted.

But it had now come. The active, intense interest of the country
was aroused, and everywhere the division among the people was
sharply defined and keen, though the numerical preponderance, it
cannot be denied, was largely against the President and insistent
upon his removal.

The dominant party of the country was aroused and active for the
deposition of the President. Public meetings were held throughout
the North and resolutions adopted and forwarded to Senators
demanding that Mr. Johnson be promptly expelled from office by
the Senate--and it had become apparent, long before the taking of
the vote, that absolute, swift, and ignominious expulsion from
office awaited every Republican Senator who should dare to
disregard that demand.

Under these conditions it was but natural that during the
trial, and especially as the close approached, the streets of
Washington and the lobbies of the Capitol were thronged from day
to day with interested spectators from every section of the
Union, or that Senators were beleaguered day and night, by
interested constituents, for some word of encouragement that a
change was about to come of that day's proceeding, and with
threats of popular vengeance upon the failure of any Republican
Senator to second that demand.

In view of this intensity of public interest it was as a matter
of course that the coming of the day when the great controversy
was expected to be brought to a close by the deposition of Mr.
Johnson and the seating of a new incumbent in the Presidential
chair, brought to the Capitol an additional throng which long
before the hour for the assembling of the Senate filled all the
available space in the vast building, to witness the culmination
of the great political trial of the age.

Upon the closing of the hearing--even prior thereto, and again
during the few days of recess that followed, the Senate had been
carefully polled, and the prospective vote of every member from
whom it was possible to procure a committal, ascertained and
registered in many a private memoranda. There were fifty-four
members--all present. According to these memoranda, the vote
would stand eighteen for acquittal, thirty-five for
conviction--one less than the number required by the Constitution
to convict. What that one vote would be, and could it be had,
were anxious queries, of one to another, especially among those
who had set on foot the impeachment enterprise and staked their
future control of the government upon its success. Given for
conviction and upon sufficient proofs, the President MUST step
down and out of his place, the highest and most honorable and
honoring in dignity and sacredness of trust in the constitution
of human government, a disgraced man and a political pariah. If
so cast upon insufficient proofs or from partisan considerations,
the office of President of the United States would be
degraded--cease to be a coordinate branch of the Government, and
ever after subordinated to the legislative will. It would have
practically revolutionized our splendid political fabric into a
partisan Congressional autocracy. Apolitical tragedy was
imminent.

On the other hand, that vote properly given for acquittal, would
at once free the Presidential office from imputed dishonor and
strengthen our triple organization and distribution of powers and
responsibilities. It would preserve the even tenor and courses of
administration, and effectively impress upon the world a
conviction of the strength and grandeur of Republican
institutions in the hands of a free and enlightened people.

The occasion was sublimely and intensely dramatic. The President
of the United States was on trial. The Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court was presiding over the deliberations of the Senate
sitting for the trial of the great cause. The board of management
conducting the prosecution brought by the House of
Representatives was a body of able and illustrious politicians
and statesmen. The President's counsel, comprising jurists among
the most eminent of the country, had summed up for the defense
and were awaiting final judgment. The Senate, transformed for the
occasion into an extraordinary judicial tribunal, the highest
known to our laws, the Senators at once judges and jurors with
power to enforce testimony and sworn to hear all the facts
bearing upon the case, was about to pronounce that judgment.

The organization of the court had been severely Democratic. There
were none of the usual accompaniments of royalty or exclusivism
considered essential under aristocratic forms to impress the
people with the dignity and gravity of a great occasion. None of
these were necessary, for every spectator was an intensely
interested witness to the proceeding, who must bear each for
himself, the public consequences of the verdict, whatever they
might be, equally with every member of the court.

The venerable Chief Justice, who had so ably and impartially
presided through the many tedious weeks of the trial now about to
close, was in his place and called the Senate to order.

The impressive dignity of the occasion was such that there was
little need of the admonition of the Chief Justice to abstention
from conversation on the part of the audience during the
proceeding. No one there present, whether friend or opponent of
the President, could have failed to be impressed with the
tremendous consequences of the possible result of the prosecution
about to be reached. The balances were apparently at a poise. It
was plain that a single vote would be sufficient to turn the
scales either way--to evict the President from his great office
to go the balance of his life's journey with the brand of infamy
upon his brow, or be relieved at once from the obloquy the
inquisitors had sought to put upon him--and more than all else,
to keep the honorable roll of American Presidents unsmirched
before the world, despite the action of the House.

The first vote was on the Eleventh and last Article of the
Impeachment. Senators voted in alphabetical order, and each arose
and stood at his desk as his name was called by the Chief Clerk.
To each the Chief Justice propounded the solemn
interrogatory--"Mr. Senator--, how say you--is the
respondent, Andrew Johnson, President of the United States,
guilty or not guilty of a high misdemeanor as charged in this
Article?"

Mr. Fessenden, of Maine, was the first of Republican Senators to
vote "Not Guilty." He had long been a safe and trusted leader in
the Senate, and had the unquestioning confidence of his partisan
colleagues, while his long experience in public life, and his
great ability as a legislator, and more especially his exalted
personal character, had won for him the admiration of all his
associates regardless of political affiliations. Being the first
of the dissenting Republicans to vote, the influence of his
action was feared by the impeachers, and most strenuous efforts
had been made to induce him to retract the position he had taken
to vote against conviction. But being moved on this occasion, as
he had always been on others, to act upon his own judgment and
conviction, though foreseeing that this vote would probably end a
long career of conspicuous public usefulness, there was no sign
of hesitancy or weakness as he pronounced his verdict.

Mr. Fowler, of Tennessee, was the next Republican to vote "Not
Guilty." He had entered the Senate but two years before, and was
therefore one of the youngest Senators, with the promise of a
life of political usefulness before him. Though from the same
State as the President, they were at political variance, and
there was but little in common between them in other respects. A
radical partisan in all measures where radical action seemed to
be called for, he was for the time being sitting in a judicial
capacity and under an oath to do justice to the accused according
to the law and the evidence. As in his judgment the evidence did
not sustain the charge against the President such was his
verdict.

Mr. Grimes, of Iowa, was the third anti-impeaching Republican to
vote. He had for many years been a conspicuous and deservedly
influential member of the Senate. For some days prior to the
taking of the vote he had been stricken with what afterwards
proved a fatal illness. The scene presented as he rose to his
feet supported on the arms of his colleagues, was grandly heroic,
and one never before witnessed in a legislative chamber. Though
realizing the danger he thus incurred, and conscious of the
political doom that would follow his vote, and having little
sympathy with the policies pursued by the President, he had
permitted himself to be borne to the Senate chamber that he might
contribute to save his country from what he deemed the stain of a
partisan and unsustained impeachment of its Chief Magistrate. Men
often perform, in the excitement and glamour of battle, great
deeds of valor and self sacrifice that live after them and link
their names with the honorable history of great events, but to
deliberately face at once inevitable political as well as
physical death in the council hall, and in the absence of
charging squadrons; and shot and shell, and of the glamor of
military heroism, is to illustrate the grandest phase of human
courage and devotion to convictions. That was the part performed
by Mr. Grimes on that occasion. His vote of "Not Guilty" was the
last, the bravest, the grandest, and the most patriotic public
act of his life.

Mr. Henderson of Missouri, was the fourth Republican Senator to
vote against the impeachment. A gentleman of rare industry and
ability, and a careful, conscientious legislator, he had been
identified with the legislation of the time and had reached a
position of deserved prominence and influence. But he was learned
in the law, and regardful of his position as a just and
discriminating judge. Though then a young man with a brilliant
future before him, he had sworn to do justice to Andrew Johnson
"according to the Constitution and law," and his verdict of "Not
Guilty" was given with the same deliberate emphasis that
characterized all his utterances on the floor of the Senate.

Mr. Ross, of Kansas, was the fifth Republican Senator to vote
"Not Guilty." Representing an intensely Radical
constituency--entering the Senate but a few months after the
close of a three years enlistment in the Union Army and not
unnaturally imbued with the extreme partisan views and prejudices
against Mr. Johnson then prevailing--his predilections were
sharply against the President, and his vote was counted upon
accordingly. But he had sworn to judge the defendant not by his
political or personal prejudices, but by the facts elicited in
the investigation. In his judgment those facts did not sustain
the charge.

Mr. Trumbull, of Illinois, was the sixth Republican Senator to
vote against the Impeachment. He had been many years in the
Senate. In all ways a safe legislator and counsellor, he had
attained a position of conspicuous usefulness. But he did not
belong to the legislative autocracy which then assumed to rule
the two Houses of Congress. To him the Impeachment was a question
of proof of charges brought, and not of party politics or
policies. He was one of the great lawyers of the body, and
believed that law was the essence of justice and not an engine of
wrong, or an instrumentality for the satisfaction of partisan
vengeance. He had no especial friendship for Mr. Johnson, but to
him the differences between the President and Congress did not
comprise an impeachable offense. A profound lawyer and clear
headed politician and statesman,, his known opposition naturally
tended to strengthen his colleagues in that behalf.

Mr. Van Winkle, of West Virginia, was the seventh and last
Republican Senator to vote against the Impeachment. Methodical
and deliberate, he was not hasty in reaching the conclusion he
did, but after giving the subject and the testimony most careful
and thorough investigation, he was forced to the conclusion that
the accusation brought by the House of Representatives had not
been sustained, and had the courage of an American Senator to
vote according to his conclusions.

The responses were as follows:

Guilty--Anthony, Cameron, Cattell, Cole, Chandler, Conkling,
Conness, Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen,
Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morton, Morrill of Maine, Morrill
of Vermont, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay,
Sherman, Sprague, Stewart, Sumner, Tipton, Thayer, Wade,
Williams, Wilson, Willey, Yates.

Not Guilty--Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fessenden,
Fowler, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Norton,
Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury, Trumbull, Van Winkle,
Vickers.

Not Guilty--19. Guilty--35--one vote less than a Constitutional
majority.



CHAPTER XI.  THE IMPEACHERS IN A MAZE. A RECESS ORDERED.

THE FINAL VOTE TAKEN.

The defeat of the Eleventh Article was the second official
set-back to the Impeachment movement--the first being the
practical abandonment of the First Article by the change in the
order of voting.

The vote had been taken on what its friends seemed to consider
its strongest proposition; the Eleventh Article having been so
framed as to group the substance, practically, of all the pending
ten Articles. The impeachers had staked their cause upon that
Article, and lost. They seemed not to have contemplated the
possibility of its defeat. So confident were they of its success,
in which event it would be immaterial what became of the other
Articles, that they apparently had agreed upon no order of
procedure after that should have been defeated. They were in the
condition of a flock of game into which the sportsman had fired a
shot and broken its ranks. They were dazed, and for a moment
seemed not to know what next to do, or which way to turn. They
did not dare now go back to the fated First Article, according to
the program agreed upon, as Mr. Sherman and Mr. Howe had
demonstrated its weakness, and they were fearful of going to the
Second or Third, as in the then temper of the anti-impeachers it
was manifest there would be little hope for either of them, and
the other eight had been already beaten without a vote, at the
conference previously held, and by Republican commitals.

The Chief Justice ordered the reading of the First Article,
according to the order agreed upon, but before that could begin,
apparently to gain time for recovery, Mr. Williams moved that the
Senate take a recess of fifteen minutes, but the motion was not
agreed to.

The Chief Justice again ordered the reading of the First Article,
but again, before the clerk could begin the reading, Mr. Williams
intervened to move an adjournment to Tuesday, the 26th day of the
month.

After numerous conflicting motions relating to the date of the
proposed reassembling, and several roll calls thereon, the
anti-impeachers generally insisting on proceeding at once to vote
on the other articles of impeachment, the motion of Mr. Williams
to adjourn to June 26th, prevailed.

Of course the purpose, and the only purpose then apparent, of
that adjournment, was to gain time, apparently in the hope of
more favorable developments in the next ten days.

The supposably strongest count of the indictment having been
beaten, it was apparent that it would be folly to hazard a vote
on any other at that time. There was a possibility that changes
might occur in the personnel of the Senate in the interim. As but
one article had been put to vote, and as that was beaten by the
lack of a single vote, there seemed a further possibility that
influences could be brought to bear, through the industry of the
House, as was very soon after developed, to secure the support of
an anti-impeaching Senator on at least one of the articles of
impeachment yet to be voted upon. A vacancy in the ranks of the
anti-impeaching Republicans to be filled by an impeaching
appointee might happen. Many contingencies were possible during
the next ten days for a reversal of the action of the Senate just
had. At all events, everything would be hazarded by permitting
further immediate action, while the situation could be rendered
no worse by delay, and time and other mollifying conditions and
influences might bring changes more promising of success.

The anti-impeachment Republicans had not long to wait for the
development of the purpose of the recess, at least so far its
supporters in the House were concerned. Immediately upon the
adjournment of the Senate, the House re-assembled, and the
following proceeding was had:

Mr. Bingham: I have been directed by the Managers on the part of
the House of Representatives, in the matter of the Impeachment of
Andrew Johnson, to report the following preamble and resolutions
for consideration at this time:

Whereas, information has come to the Managers which seems to them
to furnish probable cause to believe that improper or corrupt
means have been used to influence the determination of the Senate
upon the Articles of Impeachment submitted to the Senate by the
House of Representatives against the President of the United
States; therefore.

Be it Resolved, That for the further and more efficient
prosecution of the Impeachment of the President, the Managers be
directed and instructed to summon and examine witnesses under
oath, to send for persons and papers, and employ a stenographer,
and appoint sub-committee to take testimony; the expense thereof
to be paid from the Contingent Fund of the House.

This resolution was immediately and without debate adopted by a
vote of 88 to 14. It would be stating it mildly to say that the
House was in a tumult. The Republican leaders were wild with
rage. They had selected for the first vote what they deemed the
strongest point in their indictment, and lost; and their
vengeance now turned upon those Republican Senators who had
failed to support them. Hence the adjournment of the Senate for
ten days to afford them time to discipline the recusants and
force an additional vote for conviction on the next ballot.

The conspicuous indelicacy of this move was two-fold: 1st, in
that the House proposed to investigate the action of a
co-ordinate branch of Congress: and 2nd, that the trial not being
concluded, it had to a pointed degree the appearance of an
attempt to intimidate Senators who had voted against conviction
into changing their votes at the next ballot in fear of an
inquisition for alleged corruption. In that sense it was an act
of intimidation--a warning. It was an ill-disguised threat and a
most unseemly proceeding--yet there was not one among the
supporters of the Impeachment to condemn it, and few who failed
openly to justify it. Partisan rancor and personal and political
hostility to the President had reached a point that condoned this
indelicacy of the House towards the Senate, and justified the
public assault upon the dissenting Republican Senators, and the
insult to the Senate itself.

The demand for adjournment and delay seemed to have been
understood by the impeaching majority of the Senate, and was of
course promptly granted and further voting postponed, and the
Senate adjourned to May 26th.

The next ten day were days of unrest--of anxiety to all who were
involved or in any way interested in the impeachment proceeding.
While the result of the 16th gave hope and comfort to the
opponents of impeachment, it caused little or no perceptible
discouragement to its more radical friends. They were more active
and persistent than ever. The footsteps of the anti-impeaching
Republicans were dogged from the day's beginning to its end and
far into the night, with entreaties, considerations and threats,
in the hope of securing a reversal of the result of the 16th. The
partisan press of the States represented by the anti-impeaching
Republicans came daily filled with vigorous animadversions upon
their action, and not a few threats of violence upon their return
to their constituents. But it was in vain.

The Senate reassembled on the 26th of May to complete the vote on
the articles of impeachment. After the usual preliminary
proceedings, Mr. Williams moved to begin the voting on the Second
Article, which was had with the same result as on the 11th--and
then the Third, and still with the same result. It then became
manifest that it was useless to go farther, as all the balance
had been rendered certain of defeat, and by still more decisive
votes--a considerable number of those so far voting for
impeachment having committed themselves in the previous
conference against all the balance. So, to save themselves from
being forced to vote against impeachment on any of the articles,
there was a unanimous vote of the impeachers to abandon the case
and adjourn--and with it went glimmering the visions of office,
and spoils, and the riotous assaults on the public treasury that
had for months been organizing for the day when Mr. Johnson
should be put out and Mr. Wade put in, with the political board
clear for a NEW DEAL.

An analysis of the Eleventh, Article shows. that it comprised
four distinct counts, or accusations.

First--That Mr. Johnson had said that the Thirty-Ninth Congress
was not a Congress of the United States, but a Congress of only
part of the States, and therefore had no power to propose
amendments the Constitution.

The latter clause of this accusation was the only portion of the
first count that received any consideration during the trial, and
the only testimony brought in its support was the Parsons-Johnson
telegraphic correspondence set out in Interrogatory No. 5.

In that dispatch, referring to then pending Constitutional
amendment (the 14th) Mr. Johnson referred to Congress as "a set
of individuals." Mr. Manager Boutwell declared this expression to
be "the gist of the offense of this particular telegraphic
dispatch."

Counsel for defense objected to this testimony, but it was
received by a vote of yeas twenty-seven, nays seventeen.

As the Fourteenth Amendment was not declared adopted or a part of
the Constitution for more than a year after the transmission of
that dispatch, and as the Constitution of the United States
prohibits any abridgment of the freedom of speech, and as this
remark was unaccompanied by any act in violation of law, it is
difficult to see how it could be construed into an impeachable
offense. Moreover, saying nothing of the good taste or propriety
of that dispatch, Mr. Johnson was opposed to the proposed
amendment, and had the same right to oppose it, or to
characterize it or the members of Congress favoring it, as had
any private citizen, or as had the members of Congress to
characterize his action in the premises, without being called to
account therefor.

The second count of that article was:

Violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act of March 2nd, 1867, in
seeking to prevent the resumption by Mr. Stanton of the office of
Secretary of War.

This clause had been very effectually disposed of by Messrs.
Sherman and Howe several days before the vote was taken on the
Eleventh Article, when they pointed out the fact that the
language  cage of the first section of the Tenure-of-Office Act
clearly excepted, and was intended by the Senate, to except Mr.
Stanton and all other persons then in Mr. Johnson's Cabinet who
had been originally appointed by Mr. Lincoln and were still
holding over under Mr. Johnson without having been
recommissioned by him; and that Mr. Johnson had therefore the
legal right and power to remove them at his pleasure.

And so convincing had been the argument of those gentlemen at
that time, that there was unanimous consent on the pro-
impeachment side of the Senate, on two different occasions, to
set aside the First Article, of which the alleged unlawful
attempt to remove Mr. Stanton was practically the principal
accusation. Not illogically, that unanimous consent to abandon
the First article by thus setting it aside, and afterwards
refusing to put it to a vote, may be said to have been equivalent
to a vote of its insufficiency.

It is pertinent to suggest here that the President believed the
Tenure-of-Office Act to be unconstitutional, as it was clearly an
attempted abridgment of his power over his Cabinet which had
never before been questioned by Congress. The only method left
him for the determination of that question was in the course he
took, except by an agreed case, but it is manifest from the
record that no such agreement could be had, as an effort thereto
was made in the Thomas case in the District Court, but failed,
the prosecution withdrawing the case at the point where that
purpose of the President became manifest.

The third count was:

Attempting to prevent the execution of the Army appropriation Act
of March 2nd, 1867.

The means specified in this alleged attempt was the appointment
of Mr. Edward Cooper to be Assistant Secretary of the Treasury,
with power to draw warrants on the Treasury without the consent
of the Secretary--the purpose being to show that, with General
Thomas acting as Secretary of War, and Mr. Cooper as Assistant
Secretary of the Treasury to honor General Thomas' drafts, and
thus, in control of expenditures for the support of the Army, a
conspiracy was sought to be proven whereby the President intended
and expected to defeat the Reconstruction Acts of Congress by
preventing the use of the Army for its enforcement.

Mr. Johnson, of the Court, asked this question:

The Managers are requested to say whether they propose to show
whether Mr. Cooper was appointed by the President in November,
1867, as a means to obtain unlawful possession of the public
money, other than by the fact of the appointment itself?

Mr. Manager Butler answered:

We certainly do.

Mr. Butler read the law on this subject, passed March 2nd, 1867,
as follows:

That the Secretary of the Treasury shall have power, by
appointment under his hand and official seal, to delegate to one
of the Assistant Secretaries of the Treasury authority to sign in
his stead all warrants for the payment of money into the public
Treasury and all warrants for the disbursments from the public
Treasury of money certified by the accounting officers of the
Treasury to be due upon accounts duly audited and settle by them;
and such warrants signed shall be in all cases of the same
validity as if they had been signed by the Secretary of the
Treasury himself.

Mr. William E. Chandler, who had been Assistant Secretary of the
Treasury, was on the witness stand, called by the prosecution.
Mr. Butler asked whether it was the practice of the Assistant
Secretary to act as Secretary in case of removal of the
Secretary.

Answer: I am not certain that it is, without his appointment as
Acting Secretary by the President.

Mr. Fessenden, of the Court, propounded this interrogatory?

1st--Has it been the practice, since the passage of the law, for
an Assistant Secretary to sign warrants unless especially
appointed and authorized by the Secretary of the Treasury?

2nd--Has any Assistant Secretary been authorized to sign any
warrants except such as are specified in the Act?

The witness answered as to the first:

It has not been the practice for any Assistant Secretary since
the passage of the Act to sign warrants except upon an
appointment by the Secretary for that purpose in accordance with
the provisions of the Act. Immediately upon the passage of the
Act, the Secretary authorized one of his Assistant Secretaries to
sign warrants of the character described in the Act, and they
have been customarily signed by that Assistant Secretary in all
cases since that time.

As to the second question the answer was:

No Assistant Secretary has been authorized to sign warrants
except such as are specified in this Act, unless when acting as
Secretary.

That disposed of the third count in the Eleventh Article, and the
testimony was rejected by a vote of yeas 22, nays 27.

These answers to tire interrogatories seemed to prove the reverse
of what the Prosecution had expected. The accusation of the Third
count was not sustained.

As to the Fourth count of the Eleventh Article, that Mr. Johnson
sought to prevent the execution of the "Act to provide for the
more efficient government of the rebel States," passed March 2nd,
1867, by the removal of Mr. Stanton from the War Office, the
proceedings of the trial disclose no testimony of a sufficiently
direct character for specification, except, possibly, a number of
speeches delivered at different points by Mr. Johnson, which are
set out in the Tenth Article of the Impeachment. As that Article
was by unanimous consent abandoned and never put to vote, all its
allegations logically fell as unproven.

There was, therefore, no force and little coherency in the
Eleventh Article. It fell of its own weight. Every one of its
several averments had been disproven, or at least not proven. It
was to a good degree a summing up--an aggregation, of the entire
bill of indictment on the several distinct forms of offenses
charged--a crystallization of the whole.

The entire impeachment scheme was in reality beaten by the vote
on that Article, and the adjournment of ten days then taken could
have been only in the hope on the part of the majority that
ultimate success on some one of the remaining Articles could be
made possible, in some way, legitimate or otherwise, in part by
the importunate throng of visitors to the Capitol who were
vociferously and vindictively urging Mr. Johnson's removal
largely for reasons personal to themselves--but more especially
through the efforts of the House of Representatives to discipline
one or more of the anti-impeaching Republicans of the Senate.

The allegation of the Second Article, put to vote on the 26th,
and beaten by the same vote as was the Eleventh, was a corollary
of the First-violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act in the
appointment of General Thomas as Secretary of War ad interim,
WITHOUT THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE. This was the first
declaration ever made in the Senate that an ad interim or merely
temporary appointment to fill a vacancy, required confirmation by
that body. The power to make such an appointment is so clearly
possessed by the President without consultation of the Senate-had
been so uniformly exercised by every preceding President without
question, that argument on that point would be superfluous.

In reality the essence of the Second Article, as of the First,
was the removal of Mr. Stanton. If the President could remove him
without the consent of the Senate, which was clearly established
in the debate in the conference by Messrs. Sherman and Howe, the
way was clear for the appointment of an act interim Secretary, to
the end that the office be filled until such time as the
President would be prepared to refill the place with a Secretary
on consultation with the Senate. That was the very thing he
attempted to do on the 22nd of February, the day after Mr.
Stanton's removal, when he sent to the Senate the nomination of
Thomas Ewing, Senior, to be Secretary of War, for the action of
that body.

The Third Article was so closely analagous to the Second, that an
analysis of it would be in the nature of repetition. If there
were any distinctions between them, they were so finely drawn
that they amounted simply to a distinction without a
difference--a characteristic, indeed, of a large part of the
eleven Articles of Impeachment--a characteristic so conspicuous
that it was not deemed worth while by the majority to go further
in their submission to the Court.

These three Articles--the Second, Third and Eleventh--being the
only Articles of the entire list of eleven put to a vote, and
having been taken up and passed upon out of their numerical but
in the order of their supposed availability--must therefore be
regarded as confessedly the strongest and most likely of the
entire list to command the support of the Senate. They were
selected and set out. for the test. That selection was equivalent
to saying, "we put the Impeachment cause to test on these three
Articles. If they fail, we have nothing more to offer."

They were put to test and failed. They failed because of their
innate weakness. Failed because they proved nothing. Failed
because not a single allegation of the entire indictment was or
could be proven or tortured into all impeachable offense. Not a
remark made by the President or an act performed in all the long
and bitter controversy that. had subsisted between himself and
Congress could be brought nearer to the impeachment mark, in
fact, few if any of them so near, as had been the every day rule
in the House of Representatives during the previous two years in
their treatment of the President. Yet nobody thought of
impeaching members of the House for their every day personal
vituperations against him.

Bill after bill had been offered in Congress, and law after law
enacted, with apparently the sole purpose of hampering the
Constitutional authority apparently functions of the
President--even the assumption of Executive powers and judicial
functions by Congress--the not remote purpose of which seemed to
be his entrapment into some measure of resistance upon which
could be based an indictment. The House seemed to be literally
"lying in wait" for him, with traps set on every side for his
ensnarement.

At last, after two years of this sort of scheming and impatient
and anxious waiting, the opportunity seemed to have offered in
the alleged violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act. The fosterers
of the impeachment crusade, weary with their long vigil and
growing desperate with every additional day's delay, clutched at
the new turn of affairs like a drowning man at a floating straw,
and with the avidity of a starved gudgeon at a painted fly.

It was not strange that this sort of diplomacy, developed and
exposed as it was in the Senate, in spite of the unfair and
partisan maneuvering of the prosecution to prevent it, should
have reacted, and contributed to turn against the impeachment
movement gentlemen who entered upon the investigation under oath
to give Mr. Johnson a fair, non-partisan trial. The only surprise
was that, after the exposure of the malignant partisan spirit
that sat in judgment upon Mr. Johnson, and the utter and
absolute failure to prove any violation of law on his part, but
on the contrary, a determination to preserve from infringement
the functions of his office and prevent a revolution from
fundamental political forms by the absorption of the Executive
authority by the legislative branch of the government--that even
a majority, and more especially, that nearly two-thirds of the
Senate, could have been found at the close in support of the
Impeachment.

This record will serve to explain the omission to vote on the
First Article--Messrs. Sherman and Howe being precluded from
supporting it in consequence of the position taken by them in the
controversy between the two Houses of Congress over the first
section of the Tenure-of-Office Bill while that bill was pending,
and to avoid defeat on the first vote taken, which was inevitable
on that Article--and also to explain, so far as any explanation
is possible, the zig-zag method of conducting the
ballot--skipping all the first ten Articles and going down to the
bottom of the list for the first vote, with the promise of then
going back to the first Article and continuing to the end. but,
instead, skipping that for the second time, and starting in again
on the Second and then the Third.

Of course, the natural effect of this battle-dore and shuttle-
cock method of treating so grave a matter as an impeachment of
the President of the United States, added to the effect of the
manifest unfairness of the majority in their treatment of
testimony offered in the President's defense--was to disgust some
who doubtless entered upon the trial honestly inclined to vote
for Andrew Johnson's impeachment, but wanted it done fairly and
openly, without any suppression of pertinent testimony or
juggling for a verdict--and amusing to others, who viewed it as
proof of weakness in the indictment, and of misgiving as to the
result on the part of its supporters.

To still others it was more than that. It was not only an
indication of weakness, but of a determination to take every
possible advantage, fair and unfair, to save votes for
conviction. The impeachers not unnaturally feared the effect of
the defeat of the First Article by the nay votes of Messrs.
Sherman and Howe, and probably other Republicans, which was
certain to follow the submission of that Article to a vote. Its
only allegation was the unlawful removal of Mr. Stanton from the
office of Secretary of War in violation of the Tenure-of-Office
Act. That alleged offense was repeated in varied but more or less
specific forms, in every succeeding Article of the Impeachment
except the Tenth, and constituted the sum and substance--the
gravamen--of the entire indictment. It was the basis upon which
the impeachment super-structure had been erected. Without that
Article there was not only no foundation, but no coherence in the
recital of Mr. Johnson's alleged offenses, and when that fell by
its abandonment, the entire impeachment scheme fell with it--as,
if there were nothing in the First Article on which to hang an
impeachment, there could be nothing in those that followed and
were but an amplification--a mere exploitation--of the First.

In substantiation of this view of the First Article, the
declaration of Mr. Boutwell to that effect is here inserted. Mr.
Boutwell was chairman of the committee of the House appointed to
prepare the Articles of Impeachment upon which Mr. Johnson was
tried. On his report of these Articles to the House he said,
after speaking particularly of the Tenth Article:

The other Articles are based upon facts which are of public
knowledge, growing out of the attempt of the President to remove
Secretary Stanton from the office of Secretary for the Department
of War.

That is, that the basis of the entire accusation was the alleged
violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act in the removal of Mr.
Stanton, as recited in the First Article.

So, after taking the vote on the Second and Third Articles and
their defeat by the same vote as that on the Eleventh, it became
manifest that further effort to the impeachment of the president
on any of the remaining eight Articles would be useless, and Mr.
Williams moved that the Senate, sitting as a Court of
Impeachment, adjourn sine die, which motion was carried by the
following vote:

Yeas--Anthony, Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling
Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan,
Howard, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton,
Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman,
Sprague, Stewart, Sumner, Thayer, Tipton, Van Winkle, Wade.
Willey, Williams, Wilson, Yates--34.

Nays--Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fowler,
Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Norton, Patterson of
Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury, Trumbull, Vickers--16.

Every Senator present who had voted for conviction voted to
abandon the prosecution and end the trial, and every Senator
present who had voted against conviction, voted to continue and
go through the indictment.

Of course, it was useless to go farther with any hope of success,
as, it will be seen by this record, all the remaining Articles
were dead, beaten in caucus before the voting commenced, and by
the professed friends and leaders of the movement.

Possibly it was the anticipation of this effect of the
abandonment of the First Article, that was the "sickness" to
which Mr. Edmunds, at the outset of the voting, ten days before,
ascribed the peculiar order of taking the vote.

It is not intended to aver that there was any privity or concert
in this particular manipulation--yet it is suggestive. The
Impeachment had been dragging since the 22nd of February, to May
26th--more than three months,--and had been everywhere the
engrossing topic of the time. It was becoming tiresome-not only
to the Senate, but to the general public.

Notwithstanding the City of Washington was still filled with
people who had been waiting weary weeks and months for the
deposition of Mr. Johnson and the accession of Mr. Wade to the
Presidency, for the fulfillment of pledges of appointment based
thereon, and who were still importunate for impeachment, the
business element of the country at large was tiring of it and its
depressing effect upon the commercial activities. Even Senators
and Congressmen were being moved to a sense of the obstructive
and somewhat ridiculous phases the impeachment movement was
beginning to take on--and not a few of those who in its earlier
stages had honestly favored the movement, inside as well as
outside the membership of both Houses of Congress, had begun to
realize the actual nature and purposes, as also the shallowness
of the impeachment movement that from whatever motives it had
originated, it had degenerated very much into a game of personal
ambition--of vindictiveness--and office getting and spoils--and
practically nothing higher.

While some of its supporters who had manifestly entered upon the
trial with a determination to convict, were still insistent for
further prosecution had there been a shadow of ultimate success,
there were others who had begun to realize, weeks before the end
came, the awkwardness of the predicament in which they had
allowed themselves and their party to be placed, and desired to
abandon the enterprise.

The strain was becoming too great--there was certain to be a
recoil sooner or later. The foundations of the Impeachment were
shown to be too slender. There was a future ahead that must be
faced, but Senators must preserve their consistency. They could
not go before their pro-impeachment constituencies with a record
indicating any degree of weakening in the impeachment crusade.
They had insisted for months that Mr. Johnson must be removed,
and it would be politically inexpedient to retract.

But they wanted somebody to "help them let go."

So the plan of "desultory" procedure herein outlined seems to
have "happened"--whether by design or otherwise, is
immaterial--and that plan was made easy by the concerted
abandonment of the head and front of the indictment--the First
Article--which was side-tracked and logically carried with it all
that followed, as would manifestly have been the result if the
voting had begun on that Article.

While, to degree, the turmoils and bitterness of that time have
passed out of public mind, there are still many living who retain
a keen remembrance of the struggle and the enmities it produced.
There were during the trial many thousands of men in the City of
Washington awaiting the Impeachment and removal of the President
for the fulfillment of pledges of official appointment based
thereon, and their numbers increased as the trial progressed.

These anticipated beneficiaries were naturally not idle in
efforts to the stimulation of zeal in the cause of Impeachment,
and Senators were importuned at all seasonable and unseasonable
hours in behalf of immediate and positive action. The lively
anxiety, even anxious haste, of these patriots for their earliest
possible entry upon the service of the Government, was emphasized
on every corner and at every place of gathering, day and night,
and the lobbies of the Capitol were thronged by them during the
sessions of the Senate. No opportunity for a word with a Senator
in behalf of the immediate deposition of the President, nor any
appliance that seemed to promise a successful overture, was
overlooked or forgotten.

When these seemed to fail of the desired effect, more direct and,
it was hoped, more effective methods were resorted to. The
beleaguered Senator was reminded that the applicant represented
the united sentiment of the people of the State from which he
held his Senatorial seat--that they demanded Mr. Johnson's
conviction and removal--that that demand could not be safely
denied, trifled with, or delayed; and that if money was wanted,
to use the language of a notorious inquisitor of the House, Mr.
Butler, speaking of the possibility of securing a designated vote
for Impeachment "tell the d----d scoundrel that if he wants
money, there is a bushel of it here to be had!" Mr. Butler's
message was delivered.

So desperate were the inquisitors, and so close the certainty of
the vote, that even a project of kidnapping a Senator under the
pretense of taking a trip to Baltimore for much needed rest,
where, if the terms to be there proffered were refused, a vacancy
was to be created--by assassination, if necessary--then a recess
of the Senate to afford time for the appointment by the Governor
of that Senator's State of a successor who would vote for the
Impeachment, of the President--was entered upon and its
execution attempted. But the trip to Baltimore for "rest" was
not taken.

These are not pleasant facts to contemplate, but they somewhat
conspicuously characterized the conditions of that time, and
illustrate the real nature of the impeachment scheme. They boded
the control of the Government by the worst element of American
politics. It is unnecessary to say here what that control would
have involved. During all the previous history of the
Government--its wars and political turmoils--the
Democratic-Republican forms that characterize its administrations
have never faced so insidious or threatening a danger as during
that hour. It was a crucial test, and the result a magnificent
vindication of the wisdom and patriotism of the founders of our
composite form of Government. Its results have but strengthened
those forms and broadened the scope of the beneficent political.
institutions that have grown up under and characterize its
operation.

It was a test such as probably no other form of Government on
earth could have successfully passed, and it is to be hoped that
its like may never return.



CHAPTER XII. WAS IT A PARTISAN PROSECUTION?

The weakest point in the entire record of the Prosecution of
President Johnson, from the indictment by the House of
Representatives to the finish in the Senate, (except the Bill of
Impeachment itself, was the refusal of the more than
three-fourths
Republican majority of the Senate to permit the reception of
testimony in his behalf. That majority naturally gave them
absolute control of the proceedings, and they should have
realized from the outset that they could not afford to give it
the least tinge of partisan bias.

It is therefore not material to discuss in detail the instances
of the two interrogatories put by counsel for the Prosecution and
rejected, Nos. 4 and 28, because it was shown that their answer
would prove nothing against the President, but rather to his
vindication, and their rejection could not have occurred but for
the intervention of many more nay Republican than Democratic
votes--but will pass to the analyzation of the votes on the
twelve interrogatories propounded by counsel for Defense and
rejected, which rejections could not have occurred but by the
intervention of a large preponderance, in every instance, of the
Republican votes cast thereon, and many of them by a unanimous
Republican vote.

Without doubt, many of these votes on the admissibility of
testimony were governed by, the usual rules prevailing in the
courts, but it was deemed by others that every question not
manifestly frivolous, or not pertinent, should be permitted
answer without objection, regardless of such rules--that the
Senate sitting for the trial of an Impeachment of the President
of the United States--the occasion a great State Trial--should
not be trammeled or belittled by the technicalities common to
ordinary court practice--that the Senate was composed supposedly
of gentlemen and lawyers of high standing in their profession and
familiar with public affairs and public law--that they were
sitting in a semi-judicial capacity--not merely as Senators or
jurors, but, judges also--judges of fact as well as of law--and
constituted the highest trial body known to our laws--a tribunal
from which there was no appeal--that each of its members had
taken a solemn oath to "do impartial justice" in this cause,
absolutely unswerved by partisan or personal considerations, and
that as such each member had not only the right, but it was his
duty under his oath, as well, to hermit no obstacle or condition
to unnecessarily keep from him a knowledge of all available facts
pertinent to the cause, no matter on which side they might
weigh--to help or to hurt. That the body, each member for
himself, was the proper party to determine the admissibility of
testimony, as Mr. Manager Boutwell had declared in his opening
argument, "AFTER HE HAD HEARD IT,"and knew its trend an purport.
Every member of that body had the right to know all the witness
knew about the case, and, moreover, the witnesses were brought
for the purpose, and for the sole purpose, of telling what they
knew.

The same assurance of absolute fairness as that of Mr. Boutwell,
was also given by Mr. Bingham, another of the Managers of the
Prosecution on the part of the House, in his opening plea before
the Senate: "It is," said he, "certainly very competent for the
Senate, as it is competent for any court of justice in the trial
of cases where questions of doubt arise, to HEAR THE EVIDENCE,
and, where they themselves are the judges of both the law and the
fact, to DISMISS SO MUCH OF IT AS THEY MAY FIND INCOMPETENT, if
any of it be incompetent. * * * Under the Plea of Not Guilty, as
provided in the rules, every conceivable defense that the accused
party could make to the Articles here preferred, can be
admitted."

Mr. Manager Butler also said, on the same occasion: "Upon this so
great trial, I pray let us not belittle ourselves with the
analyses of the common law courts, or the criminal courts,
because nothing is so dangerous to mislead us."

These and other like assurances were given of the widest
reasonable latitude in the reception of testimony in the trial
then opening. There was thus every reason to expect that Mr.
Johnson would have a fair trial. But no sooner had the
Prosecution completed its examination of witnesses, in which but
seven interrogatories had been objected to of the long list
proffered by the Prosecution, than a different rule seemed to
have been established for the treatment of proffered testimony,
and a large mass of relevant and valuable testimony in behalf of
the President was ruled out on objection of the Prosecution, as
inadmissible, and, as a rule that, had very few exceptions, on
partisan divisions of the Senate.

Of course it will not be admitted, nor is it here charged, that
these refusals to hear testimony were because of any fear that
the answers would have any improper force or effect upon the
Senate. Nor will it signify to say that the President's attorneys
could not have proved what they offered to prove. They hail the
right to an opportunity to so prove, and the denial of that right
and opportunity was not only a denial of a manifest right of the
attorneys, but especially in this case, a more flagrant denial of
the rights of the accused, and not only that, but they amounted
to an impugnment of the discretion of the Senate.

It is conspicuous, too, that while the defense objected to but
seven of the interrogatories submitted by the Prosecution, and
five of them were permitted answer by the vote of the Senate;
twenty-one of the proffers of testimony by the defense were
objected to by the prosecution and but nine of them permitted
answer: and that condition was aggravated by the fact that the
numerical strength of the majority party in the Senate was
sufficient to determine absolutely the disposition of every
question, and they could therefore afford to be strictly fair to
the accused, and by the further fact that the objections to
testimony offered in behalf of the defense were as three to one
of the objections to testimony offered in behalf of the
prosecution.

These denials of testimony in behalf of the defense were
unfortunate. That practice lowered the dignity of the occasion
and of the proceeding, as they could but have given ground for
criticism of partisan bias and a vindictive judgment in case of
successful impeachment. Most, if not all these rejected
interrogatories implied important information in possession of
the witnesses which the Senate had a right to, and which the
party offering had the right to have produced. Moreover, it was
the right and the duty of the Senate to know what the witness was
presumed to know, and then to judge, each Senator for himself, of
the relevancy of the testimony.

As stated, the principal averment against the President, was his
alleged violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act in the removal of
Mr. Stanton from the office of Secretary of War, presented in
various phases throughout the Articles of Impeachment.

In illustration of the treatment of testimony offered in the
President's behalf by a majority of the Republican Senators, the
record shows that on the eighth disputed interrogatory, the
second put by the defense, General Sherman being on the witness
stand:--Defense asked as to a certain conversation relating to
that removal, had between the General and the President at an
interview specified. The prosecution objected to the question
being answered, and a vote of the Senate was demanded. The vote
was--for receiving the testimony, 23; against receiving it, 28.
Of the latter number, twenty-seven, all Republicans, voted at the
close of the trial to convict the President of violating the
Tenure-of-Office Act, in the removal of Mr. Stanton, after
refusing to hear testimony in his behalf on that charge.

The next interrogatory, No. 9, was "when the President asked the
witness (Gen. Sherman,) to accept the War Office, was anything
further said in reference to it?" This was objected to by the
prosecution, and the vote thereon was 23 to 29. Twenty-eight of
the twenty-nine gentlemen thus refusing answer to this question,
afterwards voting to convict the President, after refusing to
bear the testimony of a very important witness in his behalf,
which his counsel proposed to produce and tried in vain to get
before the Senate.

On the tenth interrogatory, by Defense, "whether the President
had stated to the witness, (General Sherman), his object in
asking him to accept the War Office," the vote was 7 to 44
against receiving it, and thirty-one of the gentlemen voting not
to hear this testimony, at the close of the hearing voted to
convict Mr. Johnson of a high misdemeanor in office in the
removal of Mr. Stanton, after refusing to hear his defense.

The next, No. 11, was as to the President's attempt to get a case
before the Supreme Court for a judicial determination of Mr.
Stanton's right to retain the War Office against the President's
wish. This testimony was refused by a vote of 25 to 27--every nay
vote being cast by a Republican, every one of whom at the close
of the trial, voting in effect to convict Mr. Johnson of a high
misdemeanor in office in seeking resort to the courts to test the
legality of an act of Congress passed for the practically sole
purpose of restricting an executive function never before
questioned.

The next interrogatory, No. 12, was whether the witness, (General
Sherman, had formed an opinion whether the good of the service
required a Secretary of War other than Mr. Stanton. It was well
understood that General Sherman believed that for the good of the
service Mr. Stanton ought to retire, and as the Chief Officer of
the Army his opinion was certainly entitled to weight, and the
President had a right to the benefit of his judgment. This
interrogatory was objected to by the Prosecution, and was
rejected by a vote of 18 to 35--thirty-one of the thirty-five
being Republicans, who at the close of the trial voted to convict
Mr. Johnson of a high misdemeanor in the removal of Mr. Stanton,
after refusing him the benefit of the opinion of the Chief
Officer of the Army on a question affecting the military service,
and to which he was in all fairness clearly entitled.

No. 13, General Sherman was asked whether he had advised, the
President to appoint a successor to Mr. Stanton. (It was well
understood that he had.) Answer to this was refused, 18 to
32--thirty of the latter, all Republicans, voting at the close of
the trial to convict Mr. Johnson, after refusing to hear this
important testimony in his behalf. No. 16. The answer to the last
interrogatory, ("if he did, state what his purpose was,") was
received by a majority of one, 26 to 25--every nay vote being a
Republican, and constituting a majority of the Republicans of the
Senate.

No. 21. Mr. O. E. Perrin on the stand, was asked as to the
President's statement that Mr. Stanton would relinquish the
office at once to General Thomas--"that it was only a temporary
arrangement"--that he would "send to the Senate at once the name
of a good man," (which he did). This testimony was rejected by a
vote of 9 to 37--thirty of the latter number being Republicans
who at the close of the trial voted to convict Mr. Johnson of a
high misdemeanor in sending to the Senate the name of Thomas
Ewing, Senior, for appointment as Secretary of War, vice Stanton
removed in assumed violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act.

The next offer of testimony to be rejected was No. 23--Mr. Gideon
Welles, Secretary of the Navy, on the stand, to prove that the
Cabinet had advised the President to veto the Tenure-of-Office
Bill as unconstitutional. The Chief Justice ruled the testimony
admissible for the purpose of showing the intent with which the
President had acted in the transaction. Prosecution objected, and
by a vote of 20 to 29, the decision of the Chief Justice was
overruled. No answer to this interrogatory was permitted, every
vote to refuse this testimony being cast by a Republican, every
one of whom, at the close of the trial, voting to convict and
remove Mr. Johnson for alleged violation of a law which he
believed to be unconstitutional--which he was advised by the head
of the Law Department of the Government was unconstitutional and
therefore not a law which he had sworn to execute, and the
constitutionality of which he had endeavored to get before the
courts for adjudication--those 29 Republicans so voting after
having refused to hear testimony in his defense on these
identical points.

The next disputed interrogatory was No. 24--that Mr. Johnson's
Cabinet had advised him that the Secretaries who had been
appointed by Mr. Lincoln and still holding, (Mr. Stanton, Mr.
Seward, and Mr. Welles,) were removable by the President,
notwithstanding the assumed restriction of the Tenure-of-Office
Act. The Chief Justice ruled this testimony to be admissible.
Objection was made by the Prosecution, and a vote taken, and the
interrogatory was rejected--22 to 26--every nay vote being a
Republican, every one of whom at the close of the trial, voting
to convict and remove Mr. Johnson from office, after having
refused to hear this very important testimony in his behalf.

Defense next offered to prove (No. 25) that it was determined by
the President, with the concurrence of the Cabinet, that an
agreed case for the determination of the constitutionality of the
Tenure-of-Office Act should be made. This testimony was objected
to, and a vote taken, which was 19 to 30. Every one of the
gentlemen voting to reject this testimony, Mr. Johnson's right to
which cannot with any possible showing of fairness be
successfully disputed, were Republicans, and after so voting, at
the close of the trial, declared by their several verdicts that
he had been fairly proven guilty of a high misdemeanor in office,
by violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act in seeking a judicial
determination of the validity of a disputed Act of Congress, and
should be expelled from office.

No. 26, was as to any suggestion by the President of the
employment of force for the vacation of any office, (relating of
course, to the War Office.) Mr. Johnson had been charged with
seeking the removal of Mr. Stanton by force, should he resist.
Knowing perfectly that the answer would be in the negative, the
Senate refused to permit answer to this interrogatory, by a vote
of 18 to 26, every one of the twenty-six gentlemen at the
close of the trial in effect voting that the President was guilty
as charged, of seeking to remove Mr. Stanton by violence, after
refusing to hear either his denial or witnesses in his behalf on
that point.

No. 27. Defense proposed to prove that the Cabinet had advised
the President that the Tenure-of-Office Act did not prevent the
removal of those members who had been originally appointed by Mr.
Lincoln. This testimony, which, if permitted answer, would, in
the minds of unprejudiced people, have at once set aside the
entire impeachment scheme, was not permitted answer. The vote was
20 to 26--every one of the twenty-six gentlemen who voted to
reject that most important and conclusive testimony in Mr.
Johnson's behalf, at the close of the examination voting to
convict him of a high misdemeanor in office by violating the
Tenure-of-Office Act in removing Mr. Stanton from the office of
Secretary of War--after refusing this offer to prove by his
Cabinet advisers; the witness himself, (Mr. Welles, and his
testimony, if received, was to be followed by that of Mr. Seward
and Mr. Stanton, all of whom had been appointed by Mr. Lincoln
and not re-appointed by Mr. Johnson,) that that act did not apply
to or protect them against removal at the pleasure of the
President. So that on eighteen of these twenty-one disputed
interrogatories put in behalf of the Defense, a majority of the
Republicans of the Senate refused in every instance to hear
testimony, after having sworn to give Mr. Johnson a fair and
impartial trial.

But the most flagrant case of unfairness to the defendant in this
examination of witnesses occurred in the treatment of
interrogatory No. 3, put by the prosecution, in their
introduction of a letter from the President to General Grant,
purporting to enclose letters from different members of the
Cabinet in substantiation of the position of the President in the
controversy then pending between Gen. Grant and himself. These
letters were enclosed with, and specifically referred to and made
a part of the President's communication, and were necessary to a
correct apprehension of the controversy, from the President's or
any other standpoint.

Being so enclosed and referred to in the letter transmitting and
enclosing them, they became quite as much a part of the
President's communication as his own letter which enclosed them.
Counsel for Defense objected to the introduction of the
President's letter without the enclosures, but the objection was
not sustained and the letters were not permitted to be
introduced, but the letter enclosing and referring to them was.
The vote on the production of the enclosures was, yeas 20, nays
29--twenty-eight of the thirty-eight Republicans present, voting
to exclude this essential testimony in the President's behalf,
and twenty-seven of the number afterwards voted to convict him of
a high misdemeanor in office in removing Mr. Stanton from the War
Office, after refusing him the benefit of the testimony of his
Constitutional Cabinet advisers in this important matter.

It is possible that under other conditions this proceeding might
have been legitimate and proper; but Mr. Johnson was on trial
under grave charges, before the highest, and supposably fairest
tribunal on earth, and had a right to the benefit of the
testimony of his cabinet, in full, and more especially when that
testimony was presented in a distorted and garbled shape by his
accusers. Moreover, every member of the Court had the right to
know what was in those letters, if any part of the correspondence
was to be received. But whether or not Mr. Johnson had the right
to the testimony in his behalf which it was claimed these
enclosures contained, he certainly had the right to resist the
introduction of mutilated testimony against him. The purpose of
the trial was to ascertain the facts in the case--all the facts
bearing on either side. The Court was sitting and the witnesses
were called for that purpose, and no other.

This record shows, that in but three instances out of twenty-one,
did a majority of the Republicans of the Senate vote to receive
testimony offered in the President's behalf--that on one
interrogatory there was an equal division--that on seventeen of
the twenty-one interrogatories put by the Defense, a majority of
the Republicans voted to exclude testimony, in several cases by a
two-thirds vote--and that but nine of the twenty-one
interrogatories put in behalf of the President were by Republican
votes permitted to be answered--also that, as a rule which had
very rare exceptions, such interrogatories in behalf of the
President as were permitted answer, were so permitted by very
close majorities.

It is undoubted that every Republican member of the Senate
entered upon that trial in the expectation that the allegations
of the Prosecution would be sustained, but it was also expected
that a fair, free, full, open investigation of all the charges
preferred would be had, and that all the information possible to
be obtained bearing upon the case, pro and con, would be admitted
to testimony--but that expectation was not realized.

To sum up this feature of the proceeding--the Republican majority
of the Senate placed themselves and their party in the attitude
of prosecutors in the case--instead of judges sworn to give the
President an impartial trial and judgment that their course had
the appearance, at least, of a conspiracy to evict the President
for purely partisan purposes, regardless of testimony or the
facts of the case-that public animosity against Mr. Johnson had
been manufactured throughout the North by wild and vicious
misrepresentations for partisan effect--that practically the
entire Republican Party machinery throughout the country was bent
to the work of prosecution. The party cry was "Crucify him!"
"Convict him anyway, and try him afterwards!" With rare
exceptions, the Republican Party of the country, press and
people, were a unit in this insensate cry.

They were ready to strike, but not to hear.

There can be but one conclusion from these premises, established
by the record of the trial--that the entire proceeding, from its
inception in the House of Representatives to its conclusion in
the Senate, was a thoroughly partisan prosecution on the part of
the majority in both Houses, and that the country was saved from
the shameful spectacle, and the dangerous consequences of such a
proceeding, by the intervention and self-sacrifice of a few
gentlemen who proposed to respect the obligation of their oath,
and give Mr. Johnson, so far as in their power, a fair trial and
judgment--and not having had such a trial--to give him the
benefit of what he claimed he could prove in his own behalf and
was not permitted to--and a verdict of "Not Guilty," regardless
of consequences to themselves.

What every member of the Court had sworn to do was "impartial
justice" to Andrew Johnson, and nothing less. The Counsel on
neither side had taken that oath, but the Court had; and its
performance of that oath was impossible without possession of all
the information relating to and bearing upon the case that it was
reasonably possible to obtain. That is the essential ingredient
and characteristic of a fair trial.

THAT ESSENTIAL INGREDIENT OF JUDICIAL FAIRNESS WAS NOT SHOWN TO
MR. JOHNSON IN THIS CASE BY THE REPUBLICAN MAJORITY OF THE
SENATE, as the official record of the trial clearly establishes.
It was an ill-disguised and malevolent partisan prosecution.



CHAPTER XIII. THE CONSTITUTIONAL POWER OF IMPEACHMENT.

The power conferred by the Constitution upon Congress to impeach
and remove the President for cause, is unquestionably a wise
provision. The natural tendency of the most patriotic of men, in
the exercise of power in great public emergencies, is to overstep
the line of absolute safety, in the conscientious conviction that
a departure from strict constitutional or legal limitations is
demanded by the public welfare.

The danger in such departures, even upon apparent necessity, if
condoned or permitted by public judgment is in the establishment
of precedents whereby greater and more dangerous infractions of
organic law may be invited, tolerated, and justified, till
government takes on a form of absolutism in one form or another,
fatal to free institutions, fatal to a government of law, and
fatal to popular liberty.

On the other hand, a too ready resort to the power of impeachment
as a remedial agent--the deposition of a public officer in the
absence of proof of the most positive and convincing character of
the impeachability of the offense alledged, naturally tends to
the other extreme, till public officers may become by common
consent removable by impeachment upon insufficient though popular
charges--even upon partisan differences and on sharply contested
questions of public administration.

The power of impeachment and removal becomes, therefore, a
two-edged sword, which must be handled with consummate judgment
and skill, and resort thereto had only in the gravest emergencies
and for causes so clearly manifest as to preclude the possibility
of partisan divisions or partisan judgments thereon. Otherwise,
too ready resort to impeachment must inevitably establish and
bring into common use a new and dangerous remedy for the cure of
assumed political ills which have their origin only in partisan
differences as to methods of administration. It would become an
engine of partisan intolerance for the punishment and ostracism
of political opponents, under the operation of which the great
office of Chief Magistrate must inevitably lose its dignity, and
decline from its Constitutional rank as a co-ordinate department
of the Government, and its occupant no longer the political head
and Chief Executive of the Nation, except in name.

It was in that sense, and to a pointed degree, that in the
impeachment and trial of Andrew Johnson the quality of
coordination of the three great Departments of Government--the
Executive, Legislative, and Judicial--was directly involved--the
House of Representatives as prosecutor--the President as
defendant--the Senate sitting as the trial court in which the
Chief Justice represented the judicial department as presiding
officer.

The anomaly of the situation was increased and its gravity
intensified, by the fact that the President pro tempore of the
Senate, who stood first in the line of succession to the
Presidency in case of conviction, was permitted, in a measure,
indeed, forced by his pro-impeachment colleagues, on a partisan
division of the Senate, to sit and vote as such President pro
tempore for the impeachment and removal of the President whom he
was to succeed.

These facts of condition attending and characterizing the trial
of President Johnson, pointedly accentuate the danger to our
composite form of government which the country then faced. That
danger, as it had found frequent illustration in the debates in
the House of Representatives on the several propositions for the
President's impeachment preceding the bringing of the indictment,
lay in the claim of superiority of political function for the
Legislative branch over the Executive. The quality of
co-ordination of these departments was repeatedly and
emphatically denied by conspicuous and influential members of
that body during the initial proceedings of the impeachment
movement, and even on the floor of the Senate by the managers of
the impeachment. To illustrate:

Mr. Bingham, in the House, Feb. 22nd, 1868, announced the
extraordinary doctrine that "there is no power to review the
action of Congress." Again, speaking of the action of the Senate
on the 21st of February, on the President's message announcing
the removal of Mr. Stanton, he said: "Neither the Supreme Court
nor any other Court can question or review this judgment of the
Senate."

The declaration was made by Messrs. Stevens and Boutwell in the
House, that the Senate was its own judge of the validity of its
own acts.

Mr. Butler, in his opening speech to the Senate, at the beginning
of the trial, used this language:

A Constitutional tribunal solely, you are bound by no law, either
Statute or Common, which may limit your constitutional
prerogative. You consult no precedents save those of the law and
custom of parliamentary bodies. You are a law unto yourselves,
bound only by the natural principles of equity and justice, and
salus populi suprema est lex.

Feb. 24, 1868, Mr. Stevens said in the House:

Neither the Executive nor the Judiciary had any right to
interfere with it (Reconstruction) except so far as was necessary
to control it by military rule until the sovereign power of the
Nation had provided for its civil administration. NO POWER BUT
CONGRESS HAD ANY RIGHT TO SAY WHETHER EVER, OR WHEN, they (the
rebel States), should be admitted to the Union as States and
entitled to the privileges of the Constitution of the United
States." * * * "I trust that when we come to vote upon this
question we shall remember that although it is the duty of the
President to see that the laws be executed, THE SOVEREIGN POWER
OF THE NATION RESTS IN CONGRESS.

Mr. Butler, the leading spirit of the impeachment enterprise,
went so far as to make the revolutionary suggestion of the
abrogation of the Presidential office in the event of final
failure to convict the President--set out in the 8th Chapter.

Mr. Sumner insisted that in no judicial sense was the Senate a
Court, and therefore not bound by the rules of judicial
procedure:

If the Senate is a Court bound to judicial forms on the expulsion
of the President, must it not be the same in the expulsion of a
Senator? But nobody attributes to it any such strictures in the
latter case. * * In the case of Blount, which is the first in our
history, the expulsion was on the report of a committee declaring
him guilty of a high misdemeanor. At least one Senator has been
expelled on simple formal motion. Others have been expelled
without any formal allegations or formal proofs. * * * The
Constitution provides that "Each House shall determine its rules
of proceeding." The Senate on the expulsion of its own members
has already done. this practically and set an example of
simplicity. But it has the same power over  its rules of
proceeding" on the expulsion of the President, and there can be
no reason for simplicity in the one case not equally applicable
in the other. Technicality is as little consonant with the one as
with the other. Each has for its object the PUBLIC SAFETY. For
this a Senator is expelled; for this, also, the President is
expelled. Salus Populi Suprema Lex. The proceedings in each case
must be in subordination to this rule."

Thus, Mr. Sumner would have removed the President by an ordinary
concurrent resolution of Congress.

The purpose of all this was apparent--that the President was in
effect, to be tried and judged before a Court of Public Opinion,
and not before the Senate sitting as a High Court of Impeachment,
but BY the Senate sitting in its legislative capacity--to create
the impression in the minds of Senators that in this high
judicial procedure they were still acting as a legislative
body--simply as Senators, and not in a judicial capacity, as
judges and jurors, and therefore not bound specifically by their
oaths as such, to convict only for crime denounced by the law, or
for manifest high political misdemeanors, but could take
cognizance of and convict on alleged partisan offenses and
allegations based on differences of opinion and partisan
prejudices and partisan predilections--that it was not essential
that the judgment of Senators should be confined to the specific
allegations of the indictment, but that the whole range of
alleged political and partisan misdemeanors and delinquencies
could be taken into account in seeking a pretext for Mr.
Johnson's conviction.

The superiority of the Legislative branch was thus openly.
advocated and insisted, and uncontroverted by any Republican
supporting the impeachment. Mr. Johnson, according to these oft
repeated declarations, was to be tried and convicted, not
necessarily for any specific violation of law, or of the
Constitution, but by prevailing public opinion--public clamor-in
a word, on administrative differences subsisting between the
President and the leaders of the dominant party in and out of
Congress, and that public opinion, as concurrent developments
fully establish, was industriously manufactured throughout the
North, on the demand of leaders of the impeachment movement in
the House, through the instrumentality of a partisan press and
partisan public meetings, and in turn reflected back upon the
Senate, in the form of resolutions denunciatory of the President
and demanding his impeachment and removal.

That was in fact, and in a large sense, the incentive to the
impeachment movement, and it was--not confined to a faction, but
characterized the dominant portion of the political party then in
the ascendancy in and out of Congress.

In this state of facts lay largely the vice of the impeachment
movement, and it illustrated to a startling degree the danger in
the departure from established forms of judicial procedure in
such cases.

It became apparent, long before the close, that it was but little
if anything more than a partisan prosecution--and that fact
became more generally and firmly fixed, from day to day, as the
trial approached conclusion.

In that state of facts, again, and in that sense, the impeachment
of the President, was an assault upon the principle of
coordination that underlies our political system and thus a
menace to our established political forms, as, if successful, it
would, logically, have been the practical destruction of the
Executive Department--and, in view of previous legislation out of
which the impeachment movement had to a degree arisen, and of
declarations in the House and Senate quoted in this connection,
the final and logical result of conviction would have been the
absorption of the Executive functions of the Government by the
Legislative Department, and the consequent declension of that
Department to a mere bureau for the registration of the decrees
of the Legislature.

Conscious of the natural tendency to infringement by a given
Department of the Government upon the functions of its
coordinates, the framers of the Constitution wisely defined the
respective spheres of the several departments, and those
definitions constitute unmistakable admonition to each as to
trespass by either upon the political territory of its
coordinates.

As John C. Calhoun wrote, in the early days of the Republic:

"The Constitution has not only made a general delegation of the
legislative power to one branch of the Government, of the
executive to another, and of the judicial to the third, but it
has specifically defined the general powers and duties of each of
those departments. This is essential to peace and safety in any
Government, and especially in one clothed only with specific
power for national purposes and erected in the midst of numerous
State Governments retaining exclusive control of their local
concerns.* * * Were there no power to interpret, pronounce and
execute the law, the Government would perish through its own
imbecility, as was the case with the Articles of Confederation;
or other powers must be assumed by the legislative body, to the
destruction of liberty." Again, as was eloquently and forcefully
said by Daniel Webster in the U. S. Senate in 1834:

"The first object of a free people is the preservation of their
liberty, and liberty is only to be preserved by maintaining
constitutional restraints and just division of political power.
Nothing is more deceptive or more dangerous than the pretense of
a desire to simplify government. The simplest governments are
despotisms; the next simplest, limited monarchies; but all
republics, all governments of law, must impose numerous
limitations and qualifications of authority and give many
positive and many qualified rights. In other words, they must be
subject to rule and regulation. This is the very essence of free
political institutions. The spirit of liberty is, indeed, a bold
and fearless spirit; but it is also a sharp-sighted spirit: it is
a cautious, sagacious, discriminating, far-seeing intelligence;
it is jealous of encroachment, jealous of power, jealous of man.
It demands checks; it seeks for guards; it insists on securities;
it entrenches itself behind strong defenses, and fortifies itself
with all possible care against the assaults of ambition and
passion. It does not trust the amiable weaknesses of human
nature, and, therefore, it will not permit power to overstep its
prescribed limits, though benevolence, good intent, and patriotic
purpose come along with it. Neither does it satisfy itself with
flashy and temporary resistance to illegal authority. Far
otherwise. It seeks for duration and permanence; it looks before
and after; and, building on the experience of ages which are
past, it labors diligently for the benefit of ages to come. This
is the nature of constitutional liberty; and this is our liberty,
if we will rightly understand and preserve it. Every free
government is necessarily complicated, because all such
governments establish restraints, as well on the power of
government itself as on that of individuals. If we will abolish
the distinction of branches, and have but one branch; if we will
abolish jury trials, and leave all to the judge; if we will then
ordain that the legislator shall himself be that judge; and if we
will place the executive power in the same hands, we may readily
simplify government. We may easily bring it to the simplest of
all possible forms, a pure despotism. But a separation of
departments, so far as practicable, and the preservation of clear
lines of division between them, is the fundamental idea in the
creation of all our constitutions; and, doubtless, the
continuance of regulated liberty depends on maintaining these
boundaries."

Each department is supreme within its own constitutionally
prescribed limits, and the Supreme Court is made the umpire for
the definition of the limits and the protection of the rights of
all. Neither Congress, nor the Executive, are authorized to
determine the constitutionality and therefore the validity of
their acts, or the limits of their jurisdiction under the
Constitution, but the Supreme Court is so authorized, and it is
the umpire before which all differences in that regard must be
determined. It is the tribunal of last resort, save the people
themselves, before whom both Senate and House, and the Executive,
must bow, and its decision is final in the interpretation of the
Constitution.

A due regard, therefore, for the interpretation of law and the
division of powers thus established, constitutes the great
safeguard upon which the harmonious and successful operation of
our political system depends. On its religious observance rests,
primarily, the preservation of our free institutions and the
perpetuation of our peculiar system of popular government. That
quality of co-ordination--of the equality of the several
Departments as adjusted by the Organic Act--constitutes the
balance wheel of our political system.

The logical effect of the doctrines promulgated by the House of
Representatives in that regard, and re-echoed on the floor of the
Senate, in the press and on the stump throughout the North, were
therefore not only revolutionary, but destructive. To have
removed the President upon accusations in reality based upon
partisan and personal--not amounting even to substantial
political differences--would have been the establishment of a
precedent of the most dangerous character.

In a large sense, the American system of politics and of
government was on trial, quite as much as was Andrew Johnson. The
extreme element of American politics was in absolute control in
the House of Representatives, and practically so, in the Senate.
The impeachment and removal of the President on unsubstantiated,
or even remotely doubtful charges, simply: because of a
disagreement between himself and Congress as to the method of
treating a great public emergency, would have introduced a new
and destructive practice into our political system.

Logically, the introduction of such a practice on that occasion
would have been construed as a precedent for the treatment of
future public emergencies. Thus, it would have tended to disturb
the now perfect adjustment of the balance of powers between the
co-ordinate branches. That quality of absolute supremacy of the
several departments in their respective spheres, or functions,
and of co-ordination or equality in their relations to each
other, established by the Constitution as a guarantee of the
perpetuity of our political system, would have been endangered,
and the result could not have been otherwise than disaster in the
future.

Logically, the Presidency would in time have been. degraded to
the position of a mere department for the execution of the
decrees of the legislative branch. Not illogically, the Supreme
Court would have been the next object of attack, and the
legislature have become, by this unconstitutional absorption of
the powers of Government, the sole, controlling force--in short
the Government.

That would, in time, by equally logical sequence, have been the
natural, inevitable result--and the end. The wreckage of the
Great Republic of the age would have been strown upon the sands
of the political seashore--relics of the disregard of the checks
and balances established by the wisdom of its framers, in the
fundamental law--and all for the satisfaction of personal
ambitions and the hates of factional animosities.

History affords too many illustrations of that tendency to
decadence and disruption from disregard of the proper and
necessary checks and balances in the distribution and
equalization of the powers of government, to permit us to doubt
what the final end would have been had the President been removed
on the unsubstantiated accusation preferred by the House of
Representatives, Our peculiar system of political government--a
Democratic Republic--passed the danger point of its history in
that hour.

It was indeed a narrow escape. The history of civilization
records no precisely similar condition. The country then passed
the most threatening period of its history--but passed it safely.
The result was the highest possible testimonial to the strength
and endurance of properly adjusted Democratic institutions that
history records.

It emphasized not only the capacity of the American people for
intelligent and orderly self-government, but also the strength
and endurance of our popular forms. It was a profound surprise to
those habituated to different political conditions. They had
witnessed with astonishment the quiet disbandment of millions of
men but as yesterday engaged in mortal strife--the vast armies as
peacefully returning to former vocations as though from a great
parade--and now, from a state of civil convulsion that in many
another nation would have produced armed collision and public
disorder, they saw an entire people quietly accepting the verdict
of the highest authoritive body of the land, and practically
dismissing the subject from thought. It was a splendid world-wide
tribute to the strength and endurance of our system of popular
government.

Yet the conclusion must not be deduced that the power of
impeachment is not a wise provision of our Constitution, nor in
any sense inconsistent with our popular forms. Conditions may,
and are not unlikely to arise, some day, when the exercise of the
power to impeach and remove the President may be quite as
essential to the preservation of our political system as it
threatened to become in this instance destructive of that system.
Should that day ever come, it is to be hoped that the remedy of
impeachment, as established by the Constitution, may be as
patriotically, as fearlessly, and as unselfishly applied as it
was on this occasion rejected.



SUPPLEMENT.

Copy of letter addressed to each of the members of the Cabinet
present at the conversation between the President and General
Grant on the 14th of January, 1868, and the answers thereto:

Executive Mansion,
Washington, D. C., February 5, 1868.

Sir:--The Chronicle of this morning contains a correspondence
between the President and General Grant, reported from the War
Department, in answer to a resolution of the House of
Representatives. I beg to call your attention to that
correspondence, and especially to that part of it which refers to
the conversation between the President and General Grant, at the
Cabinet meeting on Tuesday, the 14th of January, and to request
you to state what was said in that conversation.

Very respectfully yours,
Andrew Johnson.

Washington, D. C., February 5, 1868.

Sir:---Your note of this date was handed to me this evening. My
recollection of the conversation at the Cabinet meeting on
Tuesday, the 14th of January, corresponds with your statement of
it in the letter of the 31st ultimo, in the published
correspondence. The three points specified in that letter, giving
your recollection of the conversation, are correctly stated.

Very respectfully,
Gideon Welles.

To the President.

Treasury Department, February 6, 1868.

Sir:--I have received your note of the 5th instant, calling my
attention to the correspondence between youself and General
Grant, as published in the Chronicle of yesterday, especially to
that part of it which relates to what occurred at the Cabinet
meeting on Tuesday the 14th ultimo, and requesting me to state
what was said in the conversation referred to.

I cannot undertake to state the precise language used, but I have
no hesitation in saying that your account of that conversation.
as given in your letter to General Grant under date of the 31st
ultimo. substantially and in all important particulars accords
with my recollection of it.

With great respect, your obedient servant.
Hugh McCulloch.
To the President.

Post Office Department
Washington, February 6, 1868.

Sir:--I am in receipt of your letter of the 5th of February,
calling my attention to the correspondence published in the
Chronicle between the President and General Grant, and especially
to that part of it which refers to the conversation between the
President and General Grant at the Cabinet meeting on Tuesday,
the 14th of January, with a request that I state what was said in
that conversation. In reply, I have the honor to state that I
have read carefully the correspondence in question, and
particularly the letter of the President to General Grant, dated
January 31, 1868. The following extract from your letter of the
31st January to General Grant is, according to my recollection, a
correct statement of the conversation that took place between the
President and General Grant at the Cabinet meeting on the 14th of
January last. In the presence of the Cabinet the President asked
General Grant whether, "in conversation which took place after
his appointment as Secretary of War ad interim, he did not agree
either to remain at the head of the War Department and abide any
judicial proceedings that might follow the non-concurrence by the
Senate in Mr. Stanton's suspension, or, should he wish not to
become involved in such a controversy, to put the President in
the same position with respect to the office as he occupied
previous to General Grant's appointment by returning it to the
President in time to anticipate such action by the Senate." This
General Grant admitted.

The President then asked General Grant if, at the conference on
the preceding Saturday, he had not, to avoid misunderstanding,
requested General Grant to state what he intended to do; and
further, if in reply to that inquiry he (General Grant) had not
referred to their former conversations, saying that from them the
President understood his position, and that his (General
Grant's) action would be consistent with the understanding which
had been reached. To these questions General Grant replied in the
affirmative.

The President asked General Grant if, at the conclusion of their
interview on Saturday, it was not understood that they were to
have another conference on Monday, before final action by the
Senate in the case of Mr. Stanton.

General Grant replied that such was the understanding, but that
he did not suppose the Senate would act so soon; that on Monday
he had been engaged in a conference with General Sherman, and was
occupied with "many little matters," and asked if General Sherman
had not called on that day.

I take this mode of complying with the request contained in the
President dent's letter to me, because my attention had been
called to the subject before, when the conversation between the
President and General Grant was under consideration.

Very respectfully, your obedient servant,
Alexander W. Randall, Postmaster General.
To the President.

Department of the Interior,
Washington, D. C., February 6, 1868.

Sir:--I am in receipt of yours of yesterday, calling my attention
to a correspondence between yourself and General Grant, published
in the Chronicle newspaper, and especially to that part of said
correspondence "which refers to the conversation between the
President and General Grant at the Cabinet meeting on Tuesday,
the 14th of January," and requesting me "to state what was said
in that conversation."

In reply, I submit the following statement: At the Cabinet
meeting on Tuesday, the 14th of January, 1868, General Grant
appeared and took his accustomed seat at the board. When he had
been reached in the order of business the President asked him, as
usual, if he had anything to present?

In reply, the General, after referring to a note which he had
that morning addressed to the President, inclosing a copy of the
resolution of the Senate refusing to concur in the reasons for
the suspension of Mr. Stanton, proceeded to say that he regarded
his duties as Secretary of War ad interim terminated by that
resolution, and that he could not lawfully exercise such duties
for a moment after the adoption of the resolution by the Senate.
That the resolution reached him last night, and that this morning
he had gone to the War Department, entered the Secretary's room,
bolted one door on the inside, locked the other on the outside,
delivered the key to the Adjutant General, and proceeded to the
headquarters of the Army, and addressed the note above mentioned
to the President, informing him that he (General Grant) was no
longer Secretary of War ad interim.

The President expressed great surprise at the course which
General Grant had thought proper to pursue, and, addressing
himself to the General, proceeded to say, in substance, that he
had anticipated such action on the part of the Senate, and being
very desirous to have the constitutionality of the
Tenure-of-Office bill tested, and his right to suspend or remove
a member of the Cabinet decided by the judicial tribunals of the
country, he had some time ago, and shortly after General Grant's
appointment as Secretary of War ad interim, asked the General
what his action would be in the event that the Senate should
refuse to concur in the suspension of Mr. Stanton, and that the
General had agreed either to remain at the head of the War
Department till a decision could be obtained from the court or
resign the office in the hands of the President before the case
was acted upon by the Senate, so as to place the President in the
same situation he occupied at the time of his (Grant's)
appointment.

The President further said that the conversation was renewed on
the preceding Sunday, at which time he asked the General what he
intended to do if the Senate should undertake to reinstate Mr.
Stanton; in reply to which the General referred to their former
conversation upon the same subject, and said. "You understand my
position, and my conduct will be conformable to that
understanding:" that he (the General) then expressed a repugnance
to being made a party to a judicial proceeding, saying that he
would expose himself to fine and imprisonment by doing so, as his
continuing to discharge the duties of Secretary of War ad
interim, after the Senate should have refused to concur in the
suspension of Mr. Stanton would be a violation of the
Tenure-of-Office bill. That in reply to this he (the President)
informed General Grant he had not suspended Mr. Stanton under the
Tenure-of-Office bill, but by virtue of the powers conferred on
him by the Constitution: and that, as to the fine and
imprisonment, he (the President) would pay whatever fine was
imposed and submit to whatever imprisonment might be adjudged
against him (the General.) That they continued the conversation
for some time, discussing the law at length, and that they
finally separated without having reached a definite conclusion,
and with the understanding that the General would see the
President again on Monday.

In reply, General Grant admitted that the conversation had
occurred, and said that at the first conversation he had given it
as his opinion to the President that in the event of
non-concurrence by the Senate in the action of the President in
respect to the Secretary of War the question would have to be
decided by the court; that Mr. Stanton would have to appeal to
the court to reinstate him in office; that he would remain in
till they could be displaced and the outs put in by legal
proceeding; and that he then thought so, and had agreed that if
he should change his mind he would notify the President in time
to enable him to make another appointment, but that at the time
of the first conversation he had not looked very closely into the
law; that it had recently been discussed by the newspapers, and
that this had induced him to examine it more carefully, and that
he had come to the conclusion that if the Senate should refuse to
concur in the, suspension Mr. Stanton would thereby be
reinstated. and that he (Grant) could not continue thereafter to
act as Secretary of War ad interim, without subjecting himself to
fine and imprisonment; and that he came over on Saturday to
inform the President of this change in his views, and did so
inform him, that the President replied that he had not suspended
Mr Stanton under the Tenure-of-Office bill, but under the
Constitution, and appointed him (Grant) by virtue of the
authority derived from the Constitution, &c.; that they continued
to discuss the matter some time, and finally he left without any
conclusion having been reached, expecting to see the President
again on Monday. He then proceeded to explain why he had not
called on the President on Monday, saying that he had had a long
interview with General Sherman; that various little matters had
occupied his time till it was late, and that he did not think the
Senate would act so soon, and asked, "did not General Sherman
call on you on Monday?"

I do not know what passed between the President and General Grant
on Saturday, except as I learned it from the conversation between
them at the Cabinet meeting on Tuesday, and the foregoing is
substantially what then occurred. The precise words used on the
occasion are not, of course, given exactly in the order in which
they were spoken, but the ideas expressed and the facts stated
are faithfully preserved and presented. I have the honor to be,
sir, with great respect, your obedient servant.

O. H. Browning.
The President.


Department of State, Washington,
February 6, 1868.

Sir: The meeting to which you refer in your letter was a regular
Cabinet meeting. While the members were assembling, and before
the President had entered the Council Chamber, General Grant, on
coming in, said to me that he was in attendance there, not as a
member of the Cabinet, but upon invitation, and I replied by the
inquiry whether there was a change in the War Department. After
the President had taken his seat business went on in the usual
way of hearing matters submitted by the several secretaries. When
the time came for the Secretary of War General Grant said that he
was now there not as Secretary of War, but upon the President's
invitation, that he had retired from the War Department. A Blight
difference then appeared about the supposed invitation, General
Grant saying that the officer who had borne his letter to the
President that morning, announcing his retirement from the War
Department, had told him that the President desired to see him at
the Cabinet, to which the President answered, that when General
Grant's communication was delivered to him the President simply
replied that he supposed General Grant would be very soon at the
Cabinet meeting. I regarded the conversation thus begun as an
incidental one. It went on quite informally, and consisted of a
statement, on your part, of your views in regard to the
understanding of the tenure upon which General Grant had assented
to hold the War Department ad interim, and of his replies by way
of answer and explanation. It was respectful and courteous on
both sides. Being in this conversational form, its details could
only have been preserved by verbatim report. So far as I know, no
such report was made at the time. I can give only the general
effect of the conversation.

Certainly you stated that although you had reported the reasons
for Mr. Stanton's suspension to the Senate, you nevertheless held
that he would not be entitled to resume the office of Secretary
of War, even if the Senate should disapprove of his suspension.
and that you had proposed to have the question tested by judicial
process, to be applied to the person who should be the incumbent
of the Department, under your designation of Secretary of War ad
interim in the place of Mr. Stanton. You contended that this was
well understood between yourself and Gen. Grant; that when he
entered the War Department as Secretary ad interim he expressed
his concurrence in a belief that the question of Mr. Stanton's
restoration would be a question for the courts; that in a
subsequent conversation with General Grant you had adverted to
the understanding thus had, and that General Grant expressed his
concurrence in it: that at some conversation which had been
previously held General Grant said he still adhered to the same
construction of the law, but said if he should change his opinion
he would give you seasonable notice of it, so that you should in
any case, be placed in the same position in regard to the War
Department that you were while General Grant held it ad interim.
I did not understand General Grant as denying, nor as explicitly
admitting, these statements in the form and full extent to which
you made them. The admission of them was rather indirect and
circumstantial. though I did not understand it to be an evasive
one. He said that, reasoning from what occurred in the case of
the police in Maryland, which he regarded as a parallel one, he
was of opinion, and so assured you, that it would be his right
and duty, under your instructions, to hold the War Office after
the Senate should disapprove of Mr. Stanton's suspension until
the question should be decided upon by the courts; that he
remained until very recently of that opinion, and that on the
Saturday before the Cabinet meeting a conversation was held
between yourself and him in which the subject was generally
discussed.

General Grant's statement was, that in that conversation he had
stated to you the legal difficulties which might arise, involving
fine and imprisonment under the civil tenure bill, and that he
did not care to subject himself to those penalties; that you
replied to this remark, that you regarded the civil tenure bill
as unconstitutional. and did not think its penalties were to be
feared, or that you would voluntarily assume them; and you
insisted that General Grant should either retain the office until
relieved by yourself according to what you claimed was the
original understanding, between yourself and him, or, by
seasonable notice of change of purpose on his part, put you in
the same situation which you would be if he adhered. You claimed
that General Grant finally said in that Saturday's conversation
that you understood his views, and his proceedings thereafter
would be consistent with what had been so understood. General
Grant did not controvert nor can I say that he admitted this last
statement. Certainly General Grant did not at any time in the
Cabinet meeting insist that he had in the Saturday's conversation
either distinctly or finally advised you of his determination to
retire from the charge of the War Department otherwise than under
your own subsequent direction. He acquiesced in your statement
that the Saturday's conversation ended with an expectation that
there would be a subsequent conference on the subject, which he,
as well as yourself, supposed could seasonably take place on
Monday.

You then alluded to the fact that General Grant did not call upon
you on Monday, as you had expected from that conversation.
General Grant admitted that it was his expectation or purpose to
call upon you on Monday. General Grant assigned reasons for the
omission. He said he was in conference with General Sherman; that
there were many little matters to be attended to. He had
conversed upon the matter of the incumbency of the War Department
with General Sherman, and he expected that General Sherman would
call upon you on Monday. My own mind suggested a further
explanation, but I do not remember whether it was mentioned or
not-namely, that it was not supposed by General Grant on Monday
that the Senate would decide the question so promptly as to
anticipate further explanation between yourself and him if
delayed beyond that day. General Grant made another
explanation--that he was engaged on Sunday with General Sherman,
and, I think, also on Monday, in regard to the War Department
matter, with a hope, though he did not say in an effort, to
procure an amicable settlement of the affair of Mr. Stanton, and
he still hoped that it would be brought about.

I have the honor to be, with great respect, your obedient
servant,

William H. Seward.
To the President.





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of the Impeachment of Andrew Johnson

