Project Gutenberg Etext of Uncle Remus His Songs and His Sayings
By Joel Chandler Harris



Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Uncle Remus His Songs and His Sayings

By Joel Chandler Harris

August, 2000  [Etext #2306]


Project Gutenberg Etext of Uncle Remus His Songs and His Sayings
******This file should be named remus10.txt or remus10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, remus11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, remus10a.txt


Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.

We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

******

To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
author and by title, and includes information about how
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
for a more complete list of our various sites.

To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
at http://promo.net/pg).

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

Example FTP session:

ftp sunsite.unc.edu
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]

***

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





The Project Gutenberg Etext of Uncle Remus His Songs and His Sayings
By Joel Chandler Harris




PREFACE AND DEDICATION
TO THE NEW EDITION

To Arthur Barbette Frost:

DEAR FROST: 

I am expected to supply a preface for this new edition of my first
book-to advance from behind the curtain, as it were, and make a
fresh bow to the public that has dealt with Uncle Remus in so
gentle and generous a fashion. For this event the lights are to be
rekindled, and I am expected to respond in some formal way to an
encore that marks the fifteenth anniversary of the book. There
have been other editions-how many I do not remember-but this is
to be an entirely new one, except as to the matter: new type, new
pictures, and new binding.

But, as frequently happens on such occasions, I am at a loss for a
word. I seem to see before me the smiling faces of thousands of
children-some young and fresh, and some wearing the friendly
marks of age, but all children at heart-and not an unfriendly face
among them. And out of the confusion, and while I am trying hard
to speak the right word, I seem to hear a voice lifted above the rest,
saying "You have made some of us happy." And so I feel my heart
fluttering and my lips trembling, and I have to how silently and
him away, and hurry back into the obscurity that fits me best.

Phantoms! Children of dreams! True, my dear Frost; but if you
could see the thousands of letters that have come to me from far
and near, and all fresh from the hearts and hands of children, and
from men and women who have not forgotten how to be children,
you would not wonder at the dream. And such a dream can do no
harm. Insubstantial though it may be, I would not at this hour
exchange it for all the fame won by my mightier brethren of the
pen-whom I most humbly salute.

Measured by the material developments that have compressed
years of experience into the space of a day, thus increasing the
possibilities of life, if not its beauty, fifteen years constitute the old
age of a book. Such a survival might almost be said to be due to a
tiny sluice of green sap under the gray bark. where it lies in the
matter of this book, or what its source if, indeed, it be really
there-is more of a mystery to my middle age than it was to my
prime.

But it would be no mystery at all if this new edition were to be
more popular than the old one. Do you know why? Because you
have taken it under your hand and made it yours. Because you have
breathed the breath of life into these amiable brethern of wood and
field. Because, by a stroke here and a touch there, you have
conveyed into their quaint antics the illumination of your own
inimitable humor, which is as true to our sun and soil as it is to the
spirit and essence of the matter set forth.

The book was mine, but now you have made it yours, both sap and
pith. Take it, therefore, my dear Frost, and believe me, faithfully
yours,

Joel Chandler Harris




INTRODUCTION

I am advised by my publishers that this book is to be included in
their catalogue of humorous publications, and this friendly
warning gives me an opportunity to say that however humorous it
may be in effect, its intention is perfectly serious; and, even if it
were otherwise, it seems to me that a volume written wholly in
dialect must have its solemn, not to say melancholy, features. With
respect to the Folk-Lore scenes, my purpose has been to preserve
the legends themselves in their original simplicity, and to wed
them permanently to the quaint dialect-if, indeed, it can be called a
dialect-through the medium of which they have become a part of
the domestic history of every Southern family; and I have
endeavored to give to the whole a genuine flavor of the old
plantation.

Each legend has its variants, but in every instance I have retained
that particular version which seemed to me to be the most
characteristic, and have given it without embellishment and
without exaggeration.

The dialect, it will be observed, is wholly different from that of the
Hon. Pompey Smash and his literary descendants, and different
also from the intolerable misrepresentations of the minstrel stage,
but it is at least phonetically genuine. Nevertheless, if the language
of Uncle Remus fails to give vivid hints of the really poetic
imagination of the negro; if it fails to embody the quaint and
homely humor which was his most prominent characteristic; if it
does not suggest a certain picturesque sensitiveness-a curious
exaltation of mind and temperament not to be defined by words
-then I have reproduced the form of the dialect merely, and not the
essence, and my attempt may be accounted a failure. At any rate, I
trust I have been successful in presenting what must be, at least to
a large portion of American readers, a new and by no means
unattractive phase of negro character-a phase which may be
considered a curiously sympathetic supplement to Mrs. Stowe's
wonderful defense of slavery as it existed in the South. Mrs.
Stowe, let me hasten to say, attacked the possibilities of slavery
with all the eloquence of genius; but the same genius painted the
portrait of the Southern slave-owner, and defended him.

A number of the plantation legends originally appeared in the
columns of a daily newspaper-The Atlanta Constitution and in that
shape they attracted the attention of various gentlemen who were
kind enough to suggest that they would prove to be valuable
contributions to myth-literature. It is but fair to say that
ethnological considerations formed no part of the undertaking
which has resulted in the publication of this volume. Professor J.
W. Powell, of the Smithsonian Institution, who is engaged in an
investigation of the mythology of the North American Indians,
informs me that some of Uncle Remus's stories appear in a number
of different languages, and in various modified forms, among the
Indians; and he is of the opinion that they are borrowed by the
negroes from the red-men. But this, to say the least, is extremely
doubtful, since another investigator (Mr. Herbert H. Smith, author
of Brazil and the Amazons) has met with some of these stories
among tribes of South American Indians, and one in particular he
has traced to India, and as far east as Siam. Mr. Smith has been
kind enough to send me the proof-sheets of his chapter on The
Myths and Folk-Lore of the Amazonian Indians, in which he
reproduces some of the stories which he gathered while exploring
the Amazons.

In the first of his series, a tortoise falls from a tree upon the head
of a jaguar and kills him; in one of Uncle Remus's stories, the
terrapin falls from a shelf in Miss Meadows's house and stuns the
fox, so that the latter fails to catch the rabbit. In the next, a jaguar
catches a tortoise by the hind-leg as he is disappearing in his hole;
but the tortoise convinces him he is holding a root, and so escapes;
Uncle Remus tells how the fox endeavored to drown the terrapin,
but turned him loose because the terrapin declared his tail to be
only a stump-root. Mr. Smith also gives the story of how the
tortoise outran the deer, which is identical as to incident with
Uncle Remus's story of how Brer Tarrypin outran Brer Rabbit.
Then there is the story of how the tortoise pretended that he was
stronger than the tapir. He tells the latter he can drag him into the
sea, but the tapir retorts that he will pull the tortoise into the forest
and kill him besides. The tortoise thereupon gets a vine-stem, ties
one end around the body of the tapir, and goes to the sea, where he
ties the other end to the tail of a whale. He then goes into the
wood, midway between them both, and gives the vine a shake as a
signal for the pulling to begin. The struggle between the whale and
tapir goes on until each thinks the tortoise is the strongest of
animals. Compare this with the story of the terrapin's contest with
the bear, in which Miss Meadows's bed-cord is used instead of a
vine-stem. One of the most characteristic of Uncle Remus's stories
is that in which the rabbit proves to Miss Meadows and the girls
that the fox is his riding-horse. This is almost identical with a story
quoted by Mr. Smith, where the jaguar is about to marry the deer's
daughter. The cotia-a species of rodent-is also in love with her,
and he tells the deer that he can make a riding-horse of the jaguar.
"Well," says the deer, "if you can make the jaguar carry you, you
shall have my daughter." Thereupon the story proceeds pretty
much as Uncle Remus tells it of the fox and rabbit. The cotia
finally jumps from the jaguar and takes refuge in a hole, where an
owl is set to watch him, but he flings sand in the owl's eyes and
escapes. In another story given by Mr. Smith, the cotia is very
thirsty, and, seeing a man coming with a jar on his head, lies down
in the road in front of him, and repeats this until the man puts
down his jar to go back after all the dead cotias he has seen. This
is almost identical with Uncle Remus's story of how the rabbit
robbed the fox of his game. In a story from Upper Egypt, a fox lies
down in the road in front of a man who is carrying fowls to
market, and finally succeeds in securing them.

This similarity extends to almost every story quoted by Mr. Smith,
and some are so nearly identical as to point unmistakably to a
common origin; but when and where? when did the negro or the
North American Indian ever come in contact with the tribes of
South America? Upon this point the author of Brazil and the
Amazons, who is engaged in making a critical and comparative
study of these myth-stories, writes:

"I am not prepared to form a theory about these stories. There can
be no doubt that some of them, found among the negroes and the
Indians, had a common origin. The most natural solution would be
to suppose that they originated in Africa, and were carried to South
America by the negro slaves. They are certainly found among the
Red Negroes; but, unfortunately for the African theory, it is
equally certain that they are told by savage Indians of the Amazons
Valley, away up on the Tapajos, Red Negro, and Tapura. These
Indians hardly ever see a negro, and their languages are very
distinct from the broken Portuguese spoken by the slaves. The
form of the stories, as recounted in the Tupi and Mundurucu'
languages, seems to show that they were originally formed in those
languages or have long been adopted in them.

is interesting to find a story from Upper Egypt (that of the fox who
pretended to be dead) identical with an Amazonian story, and
strongly resembling one found by you among the negroes.
Vambagen, the Brazilian historian (now Visconde de Rio Branco),
tried to prove a relationship between the ancient Egyptians, or
other Turanian stock, and the Tupi Indians. His theory rested on
rather a slender basis, yet it must be confessed that he had one or
two strong points. Do the resemblances between old and New
World stories point to a similar conclusion? It would be hard to
say with the material that we now have.

"One thing is certain. The animal stories told by the negroes in our
Southern States and in Brazil were brought by them from Africa.
Whether they originated there, or with the Arabs, or Egyptians, or
with yet more ancient nations, must still be an open question.
Whether the Indians got them from the negroes or from some
earlier source is equally uncertain. We have seen enough to know
that a very interesting line of investigation has been opened."

Professor Hartt, in his Amazonian Tortoise Myths, quotes a story
from the Riverside Magazine of November, 1868, which will be
recognized as a variant of one given by Uncle Remus. I venture to
append it here, with some necessary verbal and phonetic
alterations, in order to give the reader an idea of the difference
between the dialect of the cofton plantations, as used by Uncle
Remus, and the lingo in vogue on the rice plantations and Sea
Islands of the South Atlantic States:

"One time B'er Deer an' B'er Cooter (Terrapin) was courtin', and de
lady did bin lub B'er Deer mo' so dan B'er Cooter. She did bin lub
B'er Cooter, but she lub B'er Deer de morest. So de noung lady say
to B'er Deer and B'er Cooter bofe dat dey mus' hab a ten-mile race,
an de one dat beats, she will go marry him.

"So B'er Cooter say to B'er Deer: 'You has got mo longer legs dan I
has, but I will run you. You run ten mile on land, and I will run ten
mile on de water!'

"So B'er Cooter went an' git nine er his fam'ly, an' put one at ebery
mile-pos', and he hisse'f, what was to run wid B'er Deer, he was
right in front of de young lady's do', in de broom-grass.

"Dat mornin' at nine o'clock, B'er Deer he did met B'er Cooter at de
fus mile-pos', wey dey was to start fum. So he call: "Well, B'er
Cooter, is you ready? Co long!' As he git on to de nex' mile-pos', he
say: 'B'er Cooter!' B'er Cooter say: 'Hullo!' B'er Deer say: 'You
dere?' B'er Cooter say: 'Yes, B'er Deer, I dere too.'

"Nex' mile-pos' he jump, B'er Deer say: 'Hullo, B'er Cooter!' B'er
Cooter say: 'Hullo, B'er Deer! you dere too?' B'er Deer say: 'Ki! it
look like you gwine fer tie me; it look like we gwine fer de gal tie!'

"W'en he git to de nine-mile pos' he tought he git dere fus, 'cause
he mek two jump; so he holler: 'B'er Cooter!' B'er Cooter answer:
'You dere too?' B'er Deer say: 'It look like you gwine tie me.' B'er
Cooter say: 'Go long, B'er Deer. I git dere in due season time,'
which he does, and wins de race."

The story of the Rabbit and the Fox, as told by the Southern
negroes, is artistically dramatic in this: it progresses in an orderly
way from a beginning to a well-defined conclusion, and is full of
striking episodes that suggest the culmination. It seems to me to be
to a certain extent allegorical, albeit such an interpretation may be
unreasonable. At least it is a fable thoroughly characteristic of the
negro; and it needs no scientific investigation to show why he
selects as his hero the weakest and most harmless of all animals,
and brings him out victorious in contests with the bear, the wolf,
and the fox. It is not virtue that triumphs, but helplessness; it is not
malice, but mischievousness. It would be presumptious in me to
offer an opinion as to the origin of these curious myth-stories; but)
if ethnologists should discover that they did not originate with the
African, the proof to that effect should be accompanied with a
good deal of persuasive eloquence.

Curiously enough, I have found few negroes who will
acknowledge to a stranger that they know anything of these
legends; and yet to relate one of the stories is the surest road to
their confidence and esteem. In this way, and in this way only, I
have been enabled to collect and verify the folklore included in
this volume. There is an anecdote about the Irishman and the
rabbit which a number of negroes have told to me with great
unction, and which is both funny and characteristic, though I will
not undertake to say that it has its origin with the black's. One day
an Irishman who had heard people talking about "mares' nests"
was going along the big road-it is always the big road in
contradistinction to neighborhood paths and by-paths, called in the
vernacular "nigh-cuts"-when he came to a pumpkin-patch. The
Irishman had never seen any of this fruit before, and he at once
concluded that he had discovered a veritable mare's nest. Making
the most of his opportunity, he gathered one of the pumpkins in his
arms and went on his way. A pumpkin is an exceedingly awkward
thing to carry, and the Irishman had not gone far before he made a
misstep, and stumbled. The pumpkin fell to the ground, rolled
down the hill into a "brush-heap," and, striking against a stump,
was broken. The story continues in the dialect: "W'en de punkin
roll in de bresh-heap, out jump a rabbit; en soon's de I'shmuns see
dat, he take atter de rabbit en holler: 'Kworp, colty! kworp, colty!'
but de rabbit, he des flew." The point of this is obvious.

As to the songs, the reader is warned that it will be found difficult
to make them conform to the ordinary rules of versification, nor is
it intended that they should so conform. They are written, and are
intended to be read, solely with reference to the regular and
invariable recurrence of the caesura, as, for instance, the first
stanza of the Revival Hymn:

"Oh, whar / shill we go / w'en de great / day comes
Wid de blow / in' er de trumpits / en de bang / in' er de 
        drums /
How man / y po' sin / ners'll be kotch'd / out late 
En fine / no latch ter de gold  / en gate /

In other words, the songs depend for their melody and rhythm
upon the musical quality of time, and not upon long or short,
accented or unaccented syllables. I am persuaded that this fact led
Mr. Sidney Lanier, who is thoroughly familiar with the metrical
peculiarities of negro songs, into the exhaustive investigation
which has resulted in the publication of his scholarly treatise on
The Science of English Verse.

The difference between the dialect of the legends and that of the
character-sketches, slight as it is, marks the modifications which
the speech of the negro has undergone even where education has
played in deed, save in the no part reforming it.  Indeed, save in
the remote country districts, the dialect of the legends has nearly
disappeared.  I am perfectly well aware that the character-sketches
are without permanent interest, but they are embodied here for the
purpose of presenting a phase of negro character wholly distinct
from that which I have endeavored to preserve in the legends. Only
in this shape, and with all the local allusions, would it be possible
to adequately represent the shrewd observations, the curious
retorts, the homely thrusts, the quaint comments, and the
humorous philosophy of the race of which Uncle Remus is the
type.

If the reader not familiar with plantation life will imagine that the
myth-stories of Uncle Remus are told night after night to a little
boy by an old negro who appears to be venerable enough to have
lived during the period which he describes-who has nothing but
pleasant memories of the discipline of slavery-and who has all the
prejudices of caste and pride of family that were the natural
results of the system; if the reader can imagine all this, he will find
little difficulty in appreciating and sympathizing with the air of
affectionate superiority which Uncle Remus assumes as he
proceeds to unfold the mysteries of plantation lore to a little child
who is the product of that practical reconstruction which has been
going on to some extent since the war in spite of the politicians
Uncle Remus describes that rcconstruction in his Story of the War,
and I may as well add here for the benefit of the curious that that
story is almost literally true.

J. C. H.




CONTENTS

LEGENDS OF THE OLD PLANTATION

I. Uncle Remus initiates tbe Little Boy
II. The Wonderful Tar-Baby Story
III.Why Mr. Possum loves Peace
IV. How Mr. Rabbit was too sharp for Mr. Fox
V. The Story of the Deluge, and how it came about 
VI. Mr. Rabbit grossly deceives Mr. Fox
VII. Mr. Fox is again victimized .
VIII. Mr. Fox is "outdone" by Mr. Buzzard
IX. Miss Cow falls a Victim to Mr. Rabbit
X. Mr. Terrapin appears upon the Scene
XI. Mr. Wolf makes a Failure
XII. Mr. Fox tackles Old Man Tarrypin
XIII. The Awful Fate of Mr. Wolf
XIV. Mr. Fox and the Deceitful Frogs .  .
XV. Mr. Fox goes a-hunting, but Mr. Rabbit bags the Game
Xvl. Old Mr. Rabbit, he's a Good Fisherman
XVJI. Mr. Rabbit nibbles up the Butter
XVIII. Mr. Rabbit finds his Match at last
XIX. The Fate of Mr. Jack Sparrow
XX. How Mr. Rabbit saved his Meat
XXI. Mr. Rabbit meets his Match again
XXII. A Story about the Little Rabbits
XXIII. Mr. Rabbit and Mr. Bear .
XXIV. Mr. Bear catches Old Mr. Bull-Frog
XXV. How Mr. Rabbit lost his Fine Bushy Tail
XXVI. Mr. Terrapin shows his Strength.
XXVII Why Mr. Possum has no Hair on his Tail
XXVIII. The End of Mr. Bear .
XXIX. Mr. Fox gets into Serious Business
XXX. How Mr. Rabbit succeeded in raising a Dust.
XXXI. A Plantation Witch
XXXII. "Jacky-my- Lanteern"
XXXIII. Why the Negro is Black
XXXIV.-The Sad Fate of Mr. Fox 
Plantation Proverbs

His Songs

I. Revival Hymn
II.Camp-Meeting Song
III. Corn-Shucking Song
IV.The Plough-hands Song
V.Chrisnas Play-Song
VI. Plantation Play-Song
VII. Transcriptions:
      1. A Plantation Chant
      2. A Plantation Serenade

VIII. De Big Bethel Church
IX.-Time goes by Turns
A Story of the War

His Sayings
I. Jeems Roher'son's Last Illness
II. Uncle Remus's Church Experience
III. Uncle Remus and the Savannah Darkey
IV. Tumip Salad as a Text
V. A Confession
VI. Uncle Remus with the Toothache
VII. The Phonograph
VIII. Race Improvement
IX. In the Role of a Tartar
X. A Case of Measles
XI. The Emigrants
XII. As a Murderer
XIII.His Practical View of Things
XIV.That Deceitful Jug
XV.The Florida Watermelon
XVI. Uncle Remns preaches to a Convert
XV1I. As to Education
XVIII. A Temperance Reformer
XIX. As a Weather Prophet
XX. The Old Man's Troubles
XXI. The Fourth of July




LEGENDS OF THE OLD PLANTATION

I UNCLE REMUS INITIATES THE LITTLE BOY

One evening recently, the lady whom Uncle Remus calls "Miss
Sally" missed her little seven-year-old. Making search for him
through the house and through the yard, she heard the sound of
voices in the old man's cabin, and, looking through the window,
saw the child sitting by Uncle Remus. His head rested against the
old man's arm, and he was gazing with an expression of the most
intense interest into the rough, weather-beaten face, that beamed
so kindly upon him. This is what "Miss Sally" heard:

"Bimeby, one day, atter Brer Fox bin doin' all dat he could fer ter
ketch Brer Rabbit, en Brer Rabbit bein doin' all he could fer ter
keep 'im fum it, Brer Fox say to hisse'f dat he'd put up a game on
Brer Rabbit, en he ain't mo'n got de wuds out'n his mouf tewl Brer
Rabbit came a lopin' up de big road, lookin' des ez plump, en ez
fat, en ez sassy ez a Moggin hoss in a barley-patch.

""Hol' on dar, Brer RAbbit,' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"'I ain't got time, Ber Fox,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, sorter mendin'
his licks.

"'I wanter have some confab wid you, Brer Rabbit,' sez Brer Fox,
sezee.

"'All right, Brer Fox, but you better holler fum whar you stan'. I'm
monstus full er fleas dis mawnin',' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"'I seed Brer B'ar yistdiddy, 'sez Brer Fox, sezee, 'en he sorter rake
me over de coals kaze you en me ain't make frens en live naberly,
en I tole 'im dat I'd see you.'

"Den Brer Rabbit scratch one year wid his off hinefoot sorter
jub'usly, en den he ups en sez, sezee:

"'All a settin', Brer Fox. Spose'n you drap roun' ter-morrer en take
dinner wid me. We ain't got no great doin's at our house, but I
speck de ole 'oman en de chilluns kin sorter scarmble roun' en git
up sump'n fer ter stay yo' stummick.'

"'I'm 'gree'ble, Brer Rabbit,' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"'Den I'll 'pen' on you,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"Nex' day, Mr. Rabbit an' Miss Rabbit got up soom, 'fo' day, en
raided on a gyarden like Miss Sally's out dar, en got some
cabbiges, en some roas'n years, en some sparrer-grass, en dey fix
up a smashin' dinner. Bimeby one er de little Rabbits, playin' ou t
in de back-yard, come runnin' in hollerin', 'Oh, ma! oh, ma! I seed
Mr. Fox a comin'!' En den Brer Rabbit he tuck de chilluns by der
years en make um set down, en den him and Miss Rabbit sorter
dally roun' waitin' for Brer Fox. En dey keep on waitin' for Brer
Fox. En dey keep on waitin', but no Brer Fox ain't come. Atter
'while Brer Rabbit goes to de do', easy like, en peep out, en dar,
stickin' fum behime de cornder, wuz de tip-een' er Brer Fox tail.
Den Brer Rabbit shot de do' en sot down, en put his paws behime
his years en begin fer ter sing:

"'De place wharbouts you spill de grease,
Right dar you er boun' ter slide, 
An' whar you fin' a bunch er ha'r,
You'll sholy fine de hide.'

"Nex' day, Brer Fox sont word by Mr. Mink, en skuze hisse'f kaze
he wuz too sick fer ter come, en he ax Brer Rabbit fer ter come en
take dinner wid him, en Brer Rabbit say he wuz 'gree'ble.

"Bimeby, w'en de shadders wuz at der shortes', Brer Rabbit he
sorter brush up en sa'nter down ter Brer Fox's house, en w'en he got
dar, he haer somebody groanin', en he look in de do' an dar he see
Brer Fox settin' up in a rockin'-cheer all wrop up wid flannil, en he
look mighty weak. Brer Rabbit look all roun', he did, but he ain't
see no dinner. De dish-pan wuz settin' on de table, en close by wuz
a kyarvin' knife. 

"'Look like you gwintee have chicken fer dinner, Brer Fox,' sez
Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"'Yes, Brer Rabbit, deyer nice, en fresh, en tender, 'sez Brer Fox,
sezee.

"Den Brer Rabbit sorter pull hiss mustarsh, en say: 'You ain't got
no calamus root, is you, Brer Fox? I done got so now dat I can't eat
no chicken 'ceppin she's seasoned up wid calamus root.' En wid dat
Brer Rabbit lipt out er de do' and dodge 'mong the bushes, en sot
dar watchin' for Brer Fox; en he ain't watch long, nudder, kaze Brer
Fox flung off de flannil en crope out er de house en got whar he
could cloze in on Brer Rabbit, en bimeby Brer Rabbit holler out:
'Oh, Brer Fox! I'll des put yo' calamus root out yer on dish yer
stump. Better come git it while hit's fresh,' and wid dat Brer Rabbit
gallop off home. En Brer Fox ain't never kotch 'im yit, en w'at's
mo', honey, he ain't gwineter."

II. THE WONDERFUL TAR BABY STORY

"Didn't the fox never catch the rabbit, Uncle Remus?" asked the
little boy the next evening.

"He come mighty nigh it, honey, sho's you born--Brer Fox did. One
day atter Brer Rabbit fool 'im wid dat calamus root, Brer Fox went
ter wuk en got 'im some tar, en mix it wid some turkentime, en fix
up a contrapshun w'at he call a Tar-Baby, en he tuck dish yer
Tar-Baby en he sot 'er in de big road, en den he lay off in de bushes
fer to see what de news wuz gwine ter be. En he didn't hatter wait
long, nudder, kaze bimeby here come Brer Rabbit pacin' down de
road--lippity-clippity, clippity -lippity--dez ez sassy ez a jay-bird.
Brer Fox, he lay low. Brer Rabbit come prancin' 'long twel he spy
de Tar-Baby, en den he fotch up on his behime legs like he wuz
'stonished. De Tar Baby, she sot dar, she did, en Brer Fox, he lay
low.

"`Mawnin'!' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee - `nice wedder dis mawnin','
sezee.

"Tar-Baby ain't sayin' nuthin', en Brer Fox he lay low.

"`How duz yo' sym'tums seem ter segashuate?' sez Brer Rabbit,
sezee.

"Brer Fox, he wink his eye slow, en lay low, en de Tar-Baby, she
ain't sayin' nuthin'.

"'How you come on, den? Is you deaf?' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.
'Kaze if you is, I kin holler louder,' sezee.

"Tar-Baby stay still, en Brer Fox, he lay low.

"'You er stuck up, dat's w'at you is,' says Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'en I;m
gwine ter kyore you, dat's w'at I'm a gwine ter do,' sezee.

"Brer Fox, he sorter chuckle in his stummick, he did, but Tar-Baby
ain't sayin' nothin'.

"'I'm gwine ter larn you how ter talk ter 'spectubble folks ef hit's de
las' ack,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee. 'Ef you don't take off dat hat en
tell me howdy, I'm gwine ter bus' you wide open,' sezee. 

"Tar-Baby stay still, en Brer Fox, he lay low.

"Brer Rabbit keep on axin' 'im, en de Tar-Baby, she keep on sayin'
nothin', twel present'y Brer Rabbit draw back wid his fis', he did,
en blip he tuck 'er side er de head. Right dar's whar he broke his
merlasses jug. His fis' stuck, en he can't pull loose. De tar hilt 'im.
But Tar-Baby, she stay still, en Brer Fox, he lay low.

"`Ef you don't lemme loose, I'll knock you agin,' sez Brer Rabbit,
sezee, en wid dat he fotch 'er a wipe wid de udder han', en dat
stuck. Tar-Baby, she ain'y sayin' nuthin', en Brer Fox, he lay low.

"`Tu'n me loose, fo' I kick de natal stuffin' outen you,' sez Brer
Rabbit, sezee, but de Tar-Baby, she ain't sayin' nuthin'. She des hilt
on, en de Brer Rabbit lose de use er his feet in de same way. Brer
Fox, he lay low. Den Brer Rabbit squall out dat ef de Tar-Baby
don't tu'n 'im loose he butt 'er cranksided. En den he butted, en his
head got stuck. Den Brer Fox, he sa'ntered fort', lookin' dez ez
innercent ez wunner yo' mammy's mockin'-birds.

"`Howdy, Brer Rabbit,' sez Brer Fox, sezee. `You look sorter stuck
up dis mawnin',' sezee, en den he rolled on de groun', en laft en laft
twel he couldn't laff no mo'. `I speck you'll take dinner wid me dis
time, Brer Rabbit. I done laid in some calamus root, en I ain't
gwineter take no skuse,' sez Brer Fox, sezee."

Here Uncle Remus paused, and drew a two-pound yam out of the
ashes.

"Did the fox eat the rabbit?" asked the little boy to whom the story
had been told.

"Dat's all de fur de tale goes," replied the old man. "He mout, an
den agin he moutent. Some say Judge B'ar come 'long en loosed
'im - some say he didn't. I hear Miss Sally callin'. You better run
'long."

III WHY MR. POSSUM LOVES PEACE

"ONE night," said Uncle Remus-taking Miss Sally's little boy on
his knee, and stroking the child's hair thoughtfully and caressingly-
"one night Brer Possum call by fer Brer Coon, 'cordin' ter
greement, en atter gobblin' up a dish er fried greens en smokin' a
seegyar, dey rambled fort' fer ter see how de ballance er de
settlement wuz gittin' long. Brer Coon, he wuz one er deze yer
natchul pacers, en he racked 'long same ez Mars John's bay pony,
en Brer Possum he went in a han'-gallup; en dey got over heap er
groun, mon. Brer Possum, he got his belly full er 'simmons, en
Brer Coon, he scoop up a 'bunnunce er frogs en tadpoles. Dey
amble long, dey did, des ez sociable ez a basket er kittens, twel
bimeby dey hear Mr. Dog talkin' ter hisse'f way off in de woods.

"'Spozen he runs up on us, Brer Possum, w'at you gwineter do?' sez
Brer Coon, sezee. Brer Possum sorter laugh 'round de cornders un
his mouf.

"'Oh, ef he come, Brer Coon, I'm gwineter stan' by you,' sez Brer
Possum. 'W'at you gwineter do?' sezee.

"'Who? me?' sez Brer Coon. 'Ef he run up onter me, I lay I give 'im
one twis',' sezee."

"Did the dog come?" asked the little boy.

"Go 'way, honey!" responded the old man, in an impressive tone.
"Go way! Mr. Dog, he come en he come a zoonin'. En he ain't wait
fer ter say howdy, nudder. He des sail inter de two un urn. De ve'y
fus pas he make Brer Possum fetch a grin fum year ter year, en
keel over like he wuz dead. Den Mr. Dog, he sail inter Brer Coon,
en right dar's whar he drap his money purse, kaze Brer Coon wuz
cut out fer dat kinder bizness, en he fa'rly wipe up de face er de
yeth wid 'im. You better b'leeve dat w'en Mr. Dog got a chance to
make hisse'f skase he tuck it, en w'at der wuz lef' un him went
skaddlin' thoo de woods like hit wuz shot outen a muskit. En Brer
Coon, he sorter lick his doze inter shape en rack off, en Brer
Possum, he lay dar like he wuz dead, twel bimeby he raise up
sorter keerful like, en w'en he fine de coas' cle'r he scramble up en
scamper off like sumpin was atter 'im."

Here Uncle Remus paused long enough to pick up a live coal of
fire in his fingers, transfer it to the palm of his hand, and thence to
his clay pipe, which he had been filling-a proceeding that was
viewed by the little boy with undisguised admiration. The old man
then proceeded:

"Nex' time Brer Possum met Brer Coon, Brer Coon 'fuse ter 'spon'
ter his howdy, en dis make Brer Possum feel mighty bad, seein' ez
how dey useter make so many 'scurshuns tergedder.

'W'at make you hor yo' head so high, Brer Coon?' sez Brer Possum,
sezee.

"'I ain't runnin' wid cowerds deze days,' sez Brer Coon. 'W'en I
wants you I'll sen' fer you,' sezee.

"Den Brer Possum git mighty mad.

"'Who's enny cowerd?' sezee.

"'You is,' sez Brer Coon, 'dat's who. I ain't so-shatin' wid dem w'at
lays down on de groun' en plays dead w'en dar's a free fight gwine
on,' sezee.

"Den Brer Possum grin en laugh fit to kill hisse'f. "'Lor', Brer
Coon, you don't speck I done dat kaze I wuz 'feared, duz you?'
sezee. 'W'y I want no mo 'feared dan you is dis minnit. W'at wuz
dey fer ter be skeered un?' sezee. 'I know'd you'd git away wid Mr.
Dog ef I didn't, en I des lay dar watchin' you shake him, waitin' fer
ter put in w'en de time come,' sezee.

"Brer Coon tu'n up his nose.

"'Dat's a mighty likely tale,' sezee, 'w'en Mr. Dog ain't mo'n tech
you 'fo' you keel over, en lay dar stiff,' sezee.

"'Dat's des w'at I wuz gwineter tell you 'bout; sez Brer Possum,
sezee. 'I want no mo' skeer'd dan you is right now, en' I wuz fixin'
fer ter give Mr. Dog a sample er my jaw,' sezee, 'but I'm de most
ticklish chap w'at you ever laid eyes on, en no sooner did Mr. Dog
put his nose down yer 'mong my ribs dan I got ter laughin', en I
laughed twel I ain't had no use er my lim's,' sezee, 'en it's a mussy
unto Mr. Dog dat I wuz ticklish, kaze a little mo' en I'd e't 'im up,'
sezee. 'I don't mine fightin', Brer Coon, no mo' dan you duz,' sezee,
'but I declar' ter grashus ef I kin stan' ficklin'. Git me in a row whar
dey ain't no ticklin' 'lowed, en I'm your man, sezee.

"En down ter dis day"-continued Uncle Remus, watching the
smoke from his pipe curl upward over the little boy's head-"down
ter dis day, Brer Possum's bound ter s'render w'en you tech him in
de short ribs, en he'll laugh ef he knows he's gwineter be smashed
fer it."

IV HOW MR. RABRIT WAS TOO SHARP FOR MR. FOX

"UNCLE REMUS," said the little boy one evening, when he had
found the old man with little or nothing to do, "did the fox kill and
eat the rabbit when he caught him with the Tar-Baby?"

"Law, honey, ain't I tell you 'bout dat?" replied the old darkey,
chuckling slyly. "I 'clar ter grashus I ought er tole you dat, but old
man Nod wuz ridin' on my eyeleds 'twel a leetle mo'n I'd a
dis'member'd my own name, en den on to dat here come yo
mammy hollerin' atter you.

"W'at I tell you w'en I fus' begin? I tole you Brer Rabbit wuz a
monstus soon creetur; leas'ways dat's w'at I laid out fer ter tell you.
Well, den, honey, don't you go en make no udder calkalashuns,
kaze in dem days Brer Rabbit en his fambly wuz at de head er de
gang w'en enny racket wuz on han', en dar dey stayed. 'Fo' you
begins fer ter wipe yo' eyes 'bout Brer Rabbit, you wait en see
whar'bouts Brer Rabbit gwineter fetch up at. But dat's needer yer
ner dar.

"W'en Brer Fox fine Brer Rabbit mixt up wid de Tar-Baby, he feel
mighty good, en he roll on de groun' en laff. Bimeby he up'n say,
sezee:

"'Well, I speck I got you dis time, Brer Rabbit, sezee; 'maybe I
ain't, but I speck I is. You been run-nin' roun' here sassin' atter me a
mighty long time, but I speck you done come ter de een' er de row.
You bin cuttin' up yo' capers en bouncin''roun' in dis neighberhood
ontwel you come ter b'leeve yo'se'f de boss er de whole gang. En
den youer allers some rs whar you got no bizuess,' sez Brer Fox,
sezee. 'Who ax you fer ter come en strike up a 'quaintance wid dish
yer Tar-Baby? En who stuck you up dar whar you iz? Nobody in de
roun' worril. You des tuck en jam yo'se'f on dat Tar-Baby widout
waitin' fer enny invite,' sez Brer Fox, sezee, en dar you is, en dar
youll stay twel I fixes up a bresh-pile and fires her up, kaze rm
gwineter bobby-cue you dis day, sho,' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"Den Brer Rabbit talk mighty 'umble.

"'I don't keer w'at you do wid me, Brer Fox,' sezee, 'so you don't
fling me in dat brier-patch. Roas' me, Brer Fox' sezee, but don't
fling me in dat brierpatch,' sezee.

"'Hit's so much trouble fer ter kindle a fier,' sez Brer Fox, sezee,
'dat I speck I'll hatter hang you,' sezee.

"'Hang me des ez high as you please, Brer Fox,' sez Brer Rabbit,
sezee, but do fer de Lord's sake don't fling me in dat brier-patch,'
sezee.

"'I ain't got no string,' sez Brer Fox, sezee, en now I speck I'll hatter
drown you,' sezee.

"'Drown me des ez deep ez you please, Brer Fox,' sez Brer Rabbit,
sezee, 'but do don't fling me in dat brier-patch,' sezee.

"'Dey ain't no water nigh,' sez Brer Fox, sezee, 'en now I speck I'll
hatter skin you,' sezee.

"'Skin me, Brer Fox,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'snatch out my
eyeballs, t'ar out my years by de roots, en cut off my legs,' sezee,
but do please, Brer Fox, don't ffing me in dat brier-patch,' sezee.

"Co'se Brer Fox wanter hurt Brer Rabbit bad ez he kin, so he cotch
'im by de behime legs en slung 'im right in de middle er de
brier-patch. Dar wuz a considerbul flutter whar Brer Rabbit struck
de bushes, en Brer Fox sorter hang 'roun' fer ter see w'at wuz
gwineter happen. Bimeby he hear somebody call 'im, en way up de
hill he see Brer Rabbit settin' crosslegged on a chinkapin log
koamin' de pitch outen his har wid a chip. Den Brer Fox know dat
he bin swop off mighty bad. Brer Rabbit wnz bleedzed fer ter fling
back some er his sass, en he holler out:

"'Bred en bawn in a brier-patch, Brer Fox-bred en bawn in a
brier-patch!' en wid dat he skip out des ez lively ez a cricket in de
embers."

V  THE STORY OF THE DELUGE AND HOW IT CAME
ABOUT

"ONE time," said Uncle Remus-adjusting his spectacles so as to be
able to see how to thread a large darning-needle with which he was
patching his coat-"one time, way back yander, 'fo' you wuz bomed,
honey, en 'fo' Mars John er Miss Sally wuz bomed-way back
yander 'fo' enny un us wuz bomed, de anemils en de creeturs sorter
'lecshuneer roun' 'mong deyselves, twel at las' dcy 'greed fer ter
have a 'sem-bly. In dem days," continued the old man, observing
a look of incredulity on the little boy's face, "in dem days creeturs
had lots mo' sense dan dey got now; let 'lone dat, dey had sense
same like folks. Hit was tech en go wid um, too, mon, en w'en dey
make up der mines w'at hatter be done, 'twant mo'n menshun'd 'fo,
hit wuz done. Well, dey 'lected dat dey hatter hole er 'sembly fer
ter sorter straighten out marters en hear de complaints, en w'en de
day come dey wuz on han'. De Lion, he wuz dar, kase he wnz de
king, en he hatter be der. De Bhynossyhoss, he wuz dar, en de
Elephent, he wuz dar, en de Cammils, en de Cows, en plum down
ter de Crawnshes, dey wnz dar. Dey wuz all dar. En w'en de Lion
shuck his mane, en tuck his seat in de big cheer, den de sesshun
begun fer ter commence.

"What did they do, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy.

"I can't skacely call to mine 'zackly w'at dey did do, but dey spoke
speeches, en hollered, en cusst, en flung der langwidge 'roun' des
like w'en yo' daddy wnz gwineter run fer de legislater en got lef'.
Howsomever, dey 'ranged der 'fairs, en splained der bizness.
Bimeby, w'ile dey wuz 'sputin' 'longer one er nudder, de Elephent
trompled on one er de Craw-fishes. Co'se w'en dat creetur put his
foot down, w'atsumever's under dar wuz bonn' fer ter be squshed,
en dey wa'n't nuff er dat Crawfish lef' fer ter tell dat he'd bin dar.

"Dis make de udder Crawnshes mighty mad, en dey sorter
swarmed tergedder en draw'd up a kinder peramble wid some
wharfo'es in it, en read her out in de 'sembly. But, bless grashus!
sech a racket wnz a gwine on dat nobody ain't hear it, 'ceppin may
be de Mud Turkle en de Spring Lizzud, en dere enfloons wuz
pow'ful lackin'.

"Bimeby, w'iles de Nunicorn wuz 'sputin' wid de Lion, en w'ile de
Hyener wnz a laughin' ter hisse'f, de Elephent squshed anudder one
er de Crawfishes, en a little mo'n he'd er ruint de Mud Turkle. Den
de Crawfishes, w'at dey wuz lef' un urn, swarmed tergedder en
draw'd up anudder peramble wid sum mo' wharfo'es; but dey might
ez well er sung Ole Dan Tucker ter a harrycane. De udder creeturs
wuz too busy wid der fussin' fer ter 'spon' unto de Crawfishes. So
dar dey wuz, de Crawnshes, en dey didn't know w'at minnit wuz
gwineter be de nex'; en dey kep' on gittin madder en madder en
skeerder en skeerder, twel bimeby dey gun de wink ter de Mud
Turkie en de Spring Lizzud, en den dey bo'd little holes in de
groun' en went down outer sight."

"Who did, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy.

"De Crawfishes, honey. Dey bo'd inter de groun' en kep' on bo'in
twel dey onloost de fountains er de earf; en de waters squirt out, en
riz higher en higher twel de hills wuz kivvered, en de creeturs wuz
all drowuded; en all bekaze dey let on 'mong deyselves dat dey
wuz bigger dan de Crawfishes."

Then the old man blew the ashes from a smoking yam, and
proceeded to remove the peeling.

"Where was the ark, Uncle Remus?" the little boy inquired,
presently.

"W'ich ark's dat?" asked the old man, in a tone of well-feigued
curiosity.

"Noah's ark," replied the child.

"Don't you pester wid ole man Noah, honey. I bonn' he tuck keer er
dat ark. Dat's w'at he wuz dar fer, en dat's w'at he done. Leas'ways,
dat's w'at dey tells me. But don't you bodder longer dat ark, 'ceppin'
your mammy fetches it up. Dey mout er bin two deloojes, en den
agin dey moutent. Ef dey wuz euny ark in dish yer w'at de
Crawfishes brung on, I ain't heern tell un it, en w'en dey ain't no
arks 'roun', I ain't got no time fer ter make urn en put urn in dar.
Hit's gittin' yo' bedtime, honey."

VI MR. RABBIT CROSSLY DECEIVES MR. FOX

ONE evening when the little boy, whose nights with Uncle Remus
were as entertaining as those Arabian ones of blessed memory, had
finished supper and hurried out to sit with his venerable patron, he
found the old man in great glee. Indeed, Uncle Remus was talkmg
and laughing to himself at such a rate that the little boy was afraid
he had company. The truth is, Uncle Remus had heard the child
coming, and, when the rosy-cheeked chap put his head in at the
door, was engaged in a monologue, the burden of which seemed to
be-

"Ole Molly Har',
W'at you doin' dar, 
Settin' in de coruder

Smokin' yo' seegyar?"

As a matter of course this vague allusion reminded the little boy of
the fact that the wicked Fox was still in pursuit of the Rabbit, and
he immediately put his curiosity in the shape of a question.

"Uncle Remus, did the Rabbit have to go clean away when he got
loose from the Tar-Baby?"

"Bless gracious, honey, dat he didn't. Who? Him? You dunno
nuthin' 'tall 'bout Brer Rabbit ef dat's de way you puttin' 'im down.
W'at he gwine 'way fer? He moughter stayed sorter close twel de
pitch rub off'n his ha'r, but tweren't menny days 'fo' he wuz lopin'
up en down de neighborhood same ez ever, en I dunno ef he
weren't mo' sassier dan befo'.

"Seem like dat de tale 'bout how he got mixt up wid de Tar-Baby
got 'roun' 'mongst de nabers. Leas'ways, Miss Meadows en de gals
got win' un' it, en de nex' time Brer Rabbit paid urn a visit Miss
Meadows tackled 'irn 'bout it, en de gals sot up a monstus
gigglement. Brer Rabbit, he sot up des ez cool ez a coweumber, he
did, en let em run on.

"Who was Miss Meadows, Uncle Remus?" inquired the little boy.

"Don't ax me, honey. She wuz in de tale, Miss Meadows en de gals
wuz, en de tale I give you like hi't wer' gun ter me. Brer Rabbit, he
sot dar, he did, sorter lam' like, en den bimeby he cross his legs, he
did, and wink his eye slow, en up and say, sezee:

"'Ladies, Brer Fox wuz my daddy's ridin'-hoss fer thirty year;
maybe mo', but thirty year dat I knows un,' sezee; en den he paid
um his 'specks, en tip his beaver, en march off, he did, des ez stiff
en ez stuck up ez a fire-stick.

"Nex' day, Brer Fox cum a callin', and w'en he gun fer ter laugh
'bout Brer Rabbit, Miss Meadows en de gals, dey ups en tells 'im
'bout w'at Brer Rabbit Say. Den Brer Fox grit his tushes sho' nuff,
he did, en he look  mighty dumpy, but w'en he riz fer ter go he up
em say, sezee:

"'Ladies, I ain't 'sputin' w'at you say, but I'll make Brer Rabbit chaw
up his words en spit urn out right yer whar you kin see 'im,' sezee,
en wid dat off Brer Fox put.

"En w'en he got in de big road, he ~shuck de dew oWn his tail, en
made a straight shoot fer Brer Rabbit's house. W'en he got dar,
Brer Rabbit wuz spectin' un 'im, en de do' wuz shet fas'. Brer Fox
knock. Nobody ain't ans'er. Brer Fox knock. Nobody ans'er. Den he
knock agin-blam! blam! Den Brer Rabbit holler out mighty weak:

'Is dat you, Brer Fox? I want you ter run en fetch de doctor. Dat
bait er pusly w'at I e't dis mawnin' is gittin' 'way wid me. Do,
please, Brer Fox, run quick,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"'I come atter you, Brer Rabbit,' sez Brer Fox, sezee. 'Dar's
gwineter be a party up at Miss Meadows's,' sezee. 'All de gals 'Ilbe
dere, en I promus' dat I'd fetch you. De gals, dey 'lowed dat hit
wouldn't be no party 'ceppin' I fotch you,' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"Den Brer Rabbit say he wnz too sick, en Brer Fox say he wuzzent,
en dar dey had it up and down, 'sputin' en contendin'. Brer Rabbit
say he can't walk. Brer Fox say he tote 'im. Brer Rabbit say how?
Brer Fox say in his arms. Brer Rabbit say he drap 'im. Brer Fox low
he won't. Bimeby Brer Rabbit say he go ef Brer Fox tote 'im on his
back. Brer Fox say he would. Brer Rabbit say he can't ride widout
a saddle. Brer Fox say he git de saddle. Brer Rabbit say he can't set
in saddle less he have bridle fer ter hol' by. Brer Fox say he git de
bridle. Brer Rabbit say he can't ride widout bline bridle, kaze Brer
Fox be shyin' at stumps long de road, en fling 'im off. Brer Fox say
he git bline bridle. Den Brer Rabbit say he go. Den Brer Fox say he
ride Brer Rabbit mos' up ter Miss Meadows's, en den he could git
down en walk de balance er de way. Brer Rabbit 'greed, en den
Brer Fox lipt out atter de saddle en de bridle. 

"Co'se Brer Rabbit know de game dat Brer Fox wuz fixin' fer ter
play, en he 'termin' fer ter outdo 'im, en by de time he koam his ha'r
en twis' his mustarsh, en sorter rig up, yer come Brer Fox, saddle
en bridle on, en lookin' ez peart ez a circus pony. He trot up ter de
do' en stan' dar pawin' de ground en chompin' de bit same like sho
'nuff hoss, en Brer Rabbit he mount, he did, en dey amble off. Brer
Fox can't see behime wid de bline bridle on, but bimeby he feel
Brer Rabbit raise one er his foots.

"'W'at you doin' now, Brer Rabbit?' sezee.

"Short'nin' de lef stir'p, Brer Fox,' sezee.

"Bimeby Brer Rabbit raise up de udder foot.


"'W'at you doin' now, Brer Rabbit?' sezee. Pullin' down my pants,
Brer Fox,' sezee.

"All de time, bless grashus, honey, Brer Rabbit wer puttin' on his
spurrers, en w'en dey got close to Miss Meadows's, whar Brer
Rabbit wuz to git off, en Brer Fox made a motion fer ter stan' still,
Brer Rabbit slap de spurrers into Brer Fox flanks, en you better
b'Ieeve he got over groun'. W'en dey got ter de house, Miss
Meadows en all de gals wuz settin' on de peazzer, en stidder
stoppin' at de gate, Brer Rabbit rid on by, he did, en den come
gallopin' down de road en up ter de hoss-rack, w'ich he hitch Brer
Fox at, en den he santer inter de house, he did, en shake han's wid
de gals, en set dar, smokin' his seegyar same ez a town man.
Bimeby he draw in a long puff, en den let hit out in a cloud, en
squar hisse'f back en holler out, he did:

"'Ladies, ain't I done tell you Brer Fox wuz de ridin'-hoss fer our
fambly? He sorter losin' his gait now, but I speck I kin fetch 'im all
right in a mont' er so,' sezee.

"En den Brer Rabbit sorter grin, he did, en de gals giggle, en Miss
Meadows, she praise up de pony, en dar wnz Brer Fox hitch fas' ter
de rack, en couldn't he'p hisse'f."

"Is that all," Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy as the old man
paused.

"Dat ain't all, honey, but 'twon't do fer ter give out too much doff
fer ter cut one pa'r pants," replied the old man sententiously.

VII MR. FOX IS AGAIN VICTIMIZED

WHEN "Miss Sally's" little boy went to Uncle Remus the next
night to hear the conclusion of the adventure in which the Rabbit
made a riding-horse of the Fox to the great enjoyment and
gratification of Miss Meadows and the girls, he found the old man
in a bad humor.

"I ain't tellin' no tales ter bad chilluns," said Uncle Remus curtly.

"But, Uncle Remus, I ain't bad," said the little boy plaintively.

"Who dat chunkin' dem chickens dis mawnin? Who dat knockin'
out fokes's eyes wid dat Yallerbammer sling des 'fo, dinner? Who
dat sickin' dat pinter puppy atter my pig? Who dat scatterin' my
ingun sets? Who dat flingin' rocks on top er my house, w'ich a little
mo' en one un em would er drap spang on my head?"

"Well, now, Uncle Remus, I didn't go to do it. I won't do so any
more. Please, Uncle Remus, if you will tell me, I'll run to the house
and bring you some tea-cakes."

"Seein' um's better'n hearin' tell un um, replied the old man, the
severity of his countenance relaxing somewhat; but the little boy
darted out, and in a few minutes came running back with his
pockets full and his hands full.

"I lay yo' mammy 'll 'spishun dat de rats' stummucks is widenin' in
dis neighborhood w'en she come fer ter count up 'er cakes," said
Uncle Remus, with a chuckle. "Deze," he continued, dividing the
cakes into two equal parts-"dese I'll tackle now, en dese Ill lay by
fer Sunday.

"Lemme see. I mos' dis'member wharbouts Brer Fox en Brer
Rabbit wuz.',

"The rabbit rode the fox to Miss Meadows's,  and hitched him to
the horse-rack,"  said the little boy.

"W'y co'se he-did," said Uncle Remus. "C'ose he did. Well, Brer
Rabbit rid Brer Fox up, he did, en tied 'im to de rack, en den sot
out in de peazzer wid de gals a smokin' er his seegyar wid mo'
proudness dan w'at you mos' ever see. Dey talk, en dey sing, en dey
play on de peanner, de gals did, twel bimeby hit come time fer
Brer Rabbit fer to be gwine, en he tell urn all good-by, en strut out
to de boss-rack same's ef he wnz de king er de patter-rollers,*1 en
den he mount Brer Fox en ride off.

"Brer Fox ain't sayin' nuthin' 'tall. He des rack off, he did, en keep
his mouf shet, en Brer Rabbit know'd der wuz bizness cookin' up
fer him, en he feel monstus skittish. Brer Fox amble on twel he git
in de long lane, outer sight er Miss Meadows's house, en den he
tu'n loose, he did. He rip en he ra'r, en he cuss, en he swar; he snort
en he cavort."

"What was he doing that for, Uncle Remus?" the little boy
inquired.

"He wuz tryin' fer ter fling Brer Rabbit off'n his back, bless yo'
soul! But he des might ez well er rastle wid his own shadder. Every
time he hump hisse'f Brer Rabbit slap de spurrers in 'im, en dar dey
had it, up en down. Brer Fox fa'rly to' up de groun' he did, en he
jump so high en he jump so quick dat he mighty nigh snatch his
own tail off. Dey kep' on gwine on dis way twel bimeby Brer Fox
lay down en roll over, he did, en dis sorter onsettle Brer Rabbit,
but by de time Brer Fox got back on his footses agin, Brer Rabbit
wuz gwine thoo de nnderbresh mo' samer dan a race-hoss. Brer
Fox he lit out atter 'im, he did, en he push Brer Rabbit so close dat
it wuz 'bout all he could do fer ter git in a holler tree. Hole too
little fer Brer Fox fer ter git in, en he hatter lay down en res en
gedder his mine tergedder.

"While he wuz layin' dar, Mr. Buzzard come floppin' 'long, en
seein' Brer Fox stretch out on de groan', he lit en view de
premusses. Den Mr. Buzzard sorter shake his wing, en put his head
on one side, en say to hisse'f like, sezee:

"'Brer Fox dead, en I so sorry,' sezee.

"'No I ain't dead, nudder,' sez Brer Fox, sezee. "1 got ole man
Rabbit pent up in yer,' sezee, 'en I'm a gwine ter git 'im dis time ef
it take twel Chris'mus,' sezee.

"Den, atter some mo' palavcr, Brer Fox make a bargain dat Mr.
Buzzard wuz ter watch de hole, en keep Brer Rabbit dar wiles Brer
Fox went atter his axe. Den Brer Fox, he lope off, he did, en Mr.
Buzzard, he tuck up his stan' at de hole. Bimeby, w'en all git still,
Brer Rabbit sorter scramble down close ter de hole, he did, en
holler out:

"'Brer Fox! Oh! Brer Fox!'

"Brer Fox done gone, en nobody say nuthin'. Den Brer Rabbit
squall out like he wuz mad; sezee:

"'You needn't talk less you wanter,' sezee; 'I knows youer dar, en I
ain't keerin',' sezee. 'I des wanter tell you dat I wish mighty bad
Brer Tukkey Buzzard wuz here,' sezee.

"Den Mr. Bnzzard try ter talk like Brer Fox:

"'W'at you want wid Mr. Buzzard?' sezee.

"'Oh, nuthin' in 'tickler, 'cep' dere's de fattes' gray squir'l in yer dat
ever I see,' sezee, 'en ef Brer Tukkey Buzzard wuz 'roun' he'd be
mighty glad fer ter git 'im,' sezee.

"'How Mr. Buzzard gwine ter git 'im?' sez de Buzzard, sezee.

"'Well, dar's a little hole roun' on de udder side er de tree,' sez Brer
Rabbit, sezee, 'en ef Brer Tukkey Buzzard wuz here so he could
take up his stan' dar,' sezee, 'I'd drive dat squir'l out,' sezee.

"'Drive 'im out, den,' sez Mr. Buzzard, sezee, 'en I'll see dat Brer
Tukkey Buzzard gits 'im,' sezee.

"Den Brer Rabbit kick up a racket, like he wer' drivin' sumpin' out,
en Mr. Buzzard he rush 'roun' fer ter ketch de squir'l, en Brer
Rabbit, he dash out, he did, en he des fly fer home."

At this point Uncle Remus took one of the teacakes, held his head
back, opened his mouth, dropped the cake in with a sudden
motion, looked at the little boy with an expression of
astonishment, and then closed his eyes, and begun to chew,
mumbling as an accompaniment the plaintive tune of "Don't you
Grieve atter Me."

The se'ance was over; but, before the little boy went into the '~big
house," Uncle Remus laid his rough hand tenderly on the child's
shoulder, and re-marked, in a confidential tone:

"Honey, you mus' git up soon Chris'mus mawnin' en open de do';
kase I'm gwineter bounce in on Marse John en Miss Sally, en
holler Chris'mus gif' des like I useter endurin' de farmin' days fo' de
war, w'en ole Miss wuz 'live. I bound' dey don't fergit de ole
nigger, nudder. W'en you hear me callin' de pigs, honey, you des
hop up en onfassen de do'. I lay I'll give Marse John one er dese yer
'sprize parties."

*1 Patrols. In the country districts, order was kept on the
plantations at night by the Imowledge that they were liable to be
visited at any moment by the patrols. Hence a song current among
the negroes, the chorus of which was:

"Run, nigger, run; patter-roller ketch you-
Run, nigger, run; hit's almos' day."

VIII MR. FOX IS "OUTDONE" BY MR. BUZZARD

"EF I don't run inter no mistakes," remarked Uncle Remus, as the
little boy came tripping in to see him after supper, "Mr. Tukkey
Buzzard wuz gyardin' de holler whar Brer Rabbit went in at, en
w'ich he come out un."

The silence of the little boy verified the old man's recollection.

"Well, Mr. Buzzard, he feel mighty lonesome, he did, but he done
prommust Brer Fox dat he'd stay, en he 'termin' fer ter sorter hang
'roun' en jine in de joke. En he ain't hatter wait long, nudder, kase
bimeby yer come Brer Fox gallopin' thoo de woods wid his axe on
his shoulder.

"'How you speck Brer Rabbit gittin' on, Brer Buzzard?' sez Brer
Fox, sezee.

"'Oh, he in dar,' sez Brer Buzzard, sezee. 'He mighty still, dough. I
speck he takin' a nap,' sezee.

"'Den I'm des in time fer ter wake im up, sez Brer Fox, sezee. En
wid dat he fling off his coat, en spit in his han's, en grab de axe.
Den he draw back en come down on de tree-pow! En eve'y time he
come down wid de axe-pow!-Mr. Buzzard, he step high, he did, en
holler out:

"'Oh, he in dar, Brer Fox. He in dar, sho.'

"En eve'y time a chip ud fly off, Mr. Buzzard, he'd jump, en dodge,
en hole his head sideways, he would, en holler:

"'He in dar, Brer Fox. I done heerd 'im. He in dar, sho.'

"En Brer Fox, he lammed away at dat holler tree, he did, like a
man maulin' rails, twel bimeby, atter he done got de tree mos' cut
thoo, he stop fer ter ketch his bref, en he seed Mr. Buzzard laughin'
behime his back, he did, en right den en dar, widout gwine enny
fudder, Brer Fox, he smelt a rat. But Mr. Buzzard, he keep on
holler'n:

"'He in dar, Brer Fox. He in dar, sho. I done seed 'im.'

"Den Brer Fox, he make like he peepin' up de holler, en he say,
sezee:

"'Run yer, Brer Buzzard, en look ef dis ain't Brer Rabbit's foot
hanging down yer.'

"En Mr. Buzzard, he come steppin' up, he did, same ez ef he wer
treddin' on kurkle-burs, en he stick his head in de hole; en no
sooner did he done dat dan Brer Fox grab 'im. Mr. Buzzard flap his
wings, en scramble 'roun' right smartually, he did, but 'twant no
use. Brer Fox had de 'vantage er de grip, he did, en he hilt 'im right
down ter de groun'. Den Mr. Buzzard squall out, sezee:

"'Lemme 'lone, Brer Fox. Tu'n me loose,' sezee; 'Brer Rabbitil git
out. Youer gittin' close at 'in, sezee, 'en leb'm mo' licks'll fetch 'im,'
sezee.

"'I'm nigher ter you, Brer Buzzard,' sez Brer Fox, sezee, 'dan Ill be
ter Brer Rabbit dis day,' sezee. 'Wa't you fool me fer?' sezee.

"'Lemme lone, Brer Fox,' sez Mr. Buzzard, sezee; my ole 'oman
waitin' fer me. Brer Rabbit in dar,' sezec.

"'Dar's a bunch er his fur on dat black-be'y bush,' sez Brer Fox,
sezee, 'en dat ain't de way he come, sezee.

"Den Mr. Buzzard up'n tell Brer Fox how 'twuz, en he low'd, Mr.
Buzzard did, dat Brer Rabbit wuz de lowdownest w'atsizname w'at
he ever run up wid. Den Brer Fox say, sezee:

Dat's needer here ner dar, Brer Buzzard,' sezee. 'I lef' you yer fer ter
watch dish yere hole, en I lef' Brer Rabbit in dar. I comes back en I
fines you at de 'ole en Brer Rabbit ain't in dar,' sezee. 'I'm gwineter
make you pay fer't. I done bin tampered wid twel plum' down ter
de sap sucker'll set on a log en sassy me. I'm gwinter fling you in a
bresh-heap en burn you up,' sezee.

"'Ef you fling me on der fier, Brer Fox, I'll fly 'way,' sez Mr.
Buzzard, sezee.

"'Well, den, I'll settle yo' hash right now,' sez Brer Fox, sezee, en
wid dat he grab Mr. Buzzard by de tail, he did, en make fer ter
dash 'im 'gin de groun', but des 'bout dat time de tail fedders come
out, en Mr. Buzzard sail off like one er dese yer berloons; en ez he
riz, he holler back:

"'You gimme good start, Brer Fox,' sezee, en Brer Fox sot dar en
watch 'im fly outer sight."

"But what became of the Rabbit, Uncle Remus?" asked the little 
boy.

"Don't you pester longer Brer Rabbit, honey, en don't you fret 'bout
'im. You'll year whar he went en how he come out. Dish yer cole
snap rastles wid my bones, now, coutmued the old man, putting on
his hat and picking up his walking-stick. "Hit rastles wid me
monstus, en I gotter rack 'roun' en see if I kin run up agin some
Chris'mus leavin's."

IX  MISS COW FALLS A VICTIM TO MR. RABBIT

"UNCLE REMUS," said the little boy, "what became of the Rabbit
after he fooled the Buzzard, and got out of the hollow tree?"

"Who? Brer Rabbit? Bless yo' soul, honey, Brer Rabbit went
skippin' long home, he did, des ez sassy ez a jay-bird at a sparrer's
nes'. He went gallopin' long, he did, but he feel mighty fired out, en
stiff in his jints, en he wnz mighty nigh dead for sumpin fer ter
drink, en bimeby, w'en he got mos' home, he spied ole Miss Cow
feedin' roun' in a fiel', he did, en he 'termin' fer ter try his han' wid
'er. Brer Rabbit know mighty well dat Miss Cow won't give 'im no
milk, kaze she done 'fuse 'im mo'n once, en w'en his ole 'oman wuz
sick, at dat. But never mind dat. Brer Rabbit sorter dance up long
side er de fence, he did, en holler out:

" 'Howdy, Sis Cow,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"'W'y, howdy, Brer Rabbit,' sez Miss Cow, sez she. "'How you fine
yo'se'f deze days, Sis Cow?' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"'I'm sorter toler'ble, Brer Rabbit; how you come on?' sez Miss
Cow, sez she.

Oh, I'm des toler'ble myse'f, Sis Cow; sorter linger'n' twix' a bauk
en a break-down,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

How yo' fokes, Brer Rabbit?' sez Miss Cow, sez she.

Dey er des middlin', Sis Cow; how Brer Bull gittin' on?' sez Brer
Rabbit, sezee.

Sorter so-so,' sez Miss Cow, sez she.

Dey er some mighty nice 'simmons up dis tree, Sis Cow,' sez Brer
Rabbit, sezee, 'en I'd like mighty well fer ter have some un um,'
sezee.

How you gwineter git um, Brer Rabbit?' sez she.

I lowed maybe dat I might ax you fer ter butt 'gin de tree, en shake
some down, Sis Cow,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"C'ose Miss Cow don't wanter diskommerdate Brer Rabbit, en she
march up ter de 'simmon tree, she did, en hit it a rap wid'er
horns-blam! Now, den," continued Uncle Remus, tearing off the
comer of a plug of tobacco and cramming it into his mouth-"now,
den, dem 'Simmons wnz green ez grass, en na'er one never drap.
Den Miss Cow butt de tree-blim! Na'er 'simmon drap. Den Miss
Cow sorter back off little, en run agin de tree-blip! No 'simmons
never drap. Den Miss Cow back off little fudder, she did, en hi'st
her tail on 'er back, en come agin de tree, kerblam! en she come so
fas', en she come so hard, twel one 'er her horns went spang thoo
de tree, en dar she wnz. She can't go forreds, en she can't go
backerds. Dis zackly w'at Brer Rabbit waitin' fer, en he no sooner
seed ole Miss Cow all fas'en'd up dan he jump up, he did, en cut de
pidjin-wing.

"'Come he'p me out, Brer Rabbit,' sez Miss Cow, sez she.

"'I can't clime, Sis Cow,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'but I'll run'n tell
Brer Bull,' sezee; en wid dat Brer Rabbit put out fer home, en
'twan't long 'fo here he come wid his ole 'oman en all his chilluns,
en de las' one er de fambly wuz totin' a pail. De big uns had
big pails, en de little uns had little pails. En dey all s'roundid ole
Miss Cow, dey did, en you hear me, honey, dey milk't 'er dry. De
ole uns milk't en de young uns milk't, en den w'en dey done got
nuff, Brer Rabbit, he up'n say, sezee:

I wish you mighty well, Sis Cow. I 'low'd. bein's how dat you'd
hatter sorter camp out all night dat I'd better come en swaje yo'
bag,' sezee."

"Do which, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy.

"Go long, honey! Swaje 'er bag. W'en cows don't git milk't, der bag
swells, en youk'n hear um a moanin' en a beller'n des like dey wuz
gittin' hurtid. Dat's w'at Brer Rabbit done. He 'sembled his fambly,
he did, en he swaje ole Miss Cow's bag.

"Miss Cow, she stood dar, she did, en she study en study, en strive
fer ter break loose, but de horn done bin jam in de tree so tight dat
twuz way 'fo day in de mornin' 'fo' she loose it. Anyhow hit wuz
endurin' er de night, en atter she git loose she sorter graze 'roun',
she did, fer ter jestify 'er stummuck she low'd, ole Miss Cow did,
dat Brer Rabbit be hoppin' long dat way fer ter see how she gittin'
on, en she tuck'n lay er trap fer 'im; en des 'bout sunrise wat'd ole
Miss Cow do but march up ter de 'simmon tree en stick er horn
back in de hole? But, bless yo' soul, honey, w'ile she wuz croppin'
de grass she tuck one moufull too menny, kaze w'en she hitch on
ter de 'simmon tree agin, Brer Rabbit wuz settin' in de fence
coruder a watchin' un 'er. Den Brer Rabbit he say ter hisse'f:

"'Heyo,' sezee, 'w'at dis yer gwine on now? Hole yo' hosses, Sis
Cow, twel you hear me comm',' sezee.

"En den he crope off down de fence, Brer Rabbit did, en bimeby
here he come-lippity-clippity, clip-pity-lippity-des a sailin' down
de big road.

"'Mornin', Sis Cow,' sez Brer Rabbit) sezee, 'bow you come on dis
mornin'?' sezee.

"Po'ly, Brer Rabbit, poly,' sez Miss Cow, sez she. 'I ain't had no res'
all night,' sez she. 'I can't pull loose,' sez she, 'but ef you'll come en
ketch holt er my tail, Brer Rabbit,' sez she, 'I reckin may be I kin
fetch my horn out,' sez she. Den Brer Rabbit, he come up little
closer, but he ain't gittin' too close.

"'I speck I'm nigh nuff, Sis Cow,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee. 'I'm a
mighty puny man, en I might git trompled,' sezee. 'You do de
pullin', Sis Cow,' sezee, en Ill do de gruntin,' sezee.

"Den Miss Cow, she pull out 'er horn, she did, en tuck atter Brer
Rabbit, en down de big road dey had it, Brer Rabbit wid his years
laid back, en Miss Cow wid 'er head down en 'er tail cuil. Brer
Rabbit kep' on gainin', en bimeby he dart in a brier-patch, en by de
time Miss Cow come long he had his head stickin' out, en his eyes
look big ez Miss Sally's chany sassers.

Heyo, Sis Cow! whar you gwine?' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"'Howdy, Brer Big-Eyes,' sez Miss Cow, sez she. 'Is you seed Brer
Rabbit go by?'

He des dis minit pass,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'en he look mighty
sick,' sezee.

"En wid dat, Miss Cow tuck down de road like de dogs wnz atter
er, en Brer Rabbit, he des lay down dar in de brier-patch en roll en
laugh twel his sides hurtid 'im. He bleedzd ter laff. Fox atter 'im,
Buzzard atter 'im, en Cow atter 'im, en dey ain't kotch 'in ylt.

X  MR. TERRAPIN APPEARS UPON THE SCENE

"MISS SALLY'S" little boy again occupying the anxious position
of auditor, Uncle Remus took the shovel and "put de noses er de
chunks tergedder," as he expressed it, and then began:

"One day, atter Sis Cow done run pas' 'er own shadder tryin' fer ter
ketch 'im. Brer Rabbit tuck'n low dat he wuz gwineter drap in en
see Miss Meadows en de gals, en he got out his piece er
lookin'-glass en primp up, he did, en sot out. Gwine canterin' long
de road, who should Brer Rabbit run up wid but ole Brer
Tarrypin-de same ole one-en-sixpunce. Brer Rabbit Stop, he did,
en rap on de roof er Brer Tarrypin house."

"On the roof of his house, Uncle Remus?" interrupted the little
boy.

"Co'se honey, Brer Tarrypin kare his house wid 'im. Rain er shine,
hot er cole, strike up wid ole Brer

Tarrypin w'en you will en w'ilst you may, en whar you fine 'im, dar
you'll fine his shanty. Hit's des like I tell you. So den! Brer Rabbit
he rap on de roof er Brer Tarrypin's house, he did, en ax wuz he in,
en Brer Tarrypin low dat he wuz, en den Brer Rabbit, he ax 'im
howdy) en den Brer Tarrypin he likewise 'spon' howdy, en den
Brer Rabbit he say whar waz Brer Tarrypin gwine, en Brer
Tarrypin, he say w'ich he wern't gwine nowhar skasely. Den Brer
Rabbit 'low he wuz on his way fer ter see Miss Meadows en de
gals, en he ax Brer Tarrypin ef he won't jine in en go long, en Brer
Tarrypin 'spon' he don't keer ef he do, en den dey sot out. Dey had
plenty er time fer confabbin' 'long de way, but bimeby dey got dar,
en Miss Meadows en de gals dey come ter de do', dey did, en ax
um in, en in dey went.

"W'en dey got in, Brer Tarrypin wuz so flat-footed dat he wuz too
low on de flo', en he wern't high nuff in a cheer, but while dey wnz
all scrambling' 'roun' tryin' fer ter git Brer Tarrypin a cheer, Brer
Rabbit, he pick 'im up en put 'im on de shelf whar de water-bucket
sot, en ole Brer Tarrypin, he lay back up dar, he did, des es proud
ez a nigger wid a cook possum.

"Co'se de talk fell on Brer Fox, en Miss Meadows en de gals make
a great 'miration 'bout w'at a gaily n.din'-hoss Brer Fox wnz, en dey
make lots er fun, en laugh en giggle same like gals duz deze days.
Brer Rabbit, he sot dar in de cheer smokin' his seegyar, en he
sorter kler up his th'oat, en say, sezee:

"T'd er rid 'im over dis mawnin', ladies,' sezee, but I rid 'im so hard
yistiddy dat he went lame in de off fo' leg, en I speck I'll hatter
swop 'im off yit,' sezee. 

"Den Brer Tarrypin, he up'n say, sezee:

"'Well, ef you gwinter sell 'im, Brer Rabbit,' sezee, 'sell him
some'rs outen dis naberhood, kase he done bin yer too long now,'
sezee. 'No longer'n day 'fo' yistiddy,' sezee, 'Brer Fox pass me on de
road, en whatter you reckin he say?' sezee:

"'Law, Brer Tarrypin,' sez Miss Meadows, sez she, 'you don't mean
ter say he cust?' sez she, en den de gals hilt der fans up 'fo' der
faces.

"'Oh, no, ma'm,' sez Brer Tarrypin, sezee, 'he didn't cust, but he
holler out-"Heyo, Stinkin' Jim!"' sezee.

"'Oh, my! You hear dat, gals?' sez Miss Meadows, sez she; 'Brer
Fox call Brer Tarrypin Stinkin' Jim,' sez she, en den Miss Meadows
en de gals make great wonderment how Brer Fox kin talk dat a
way 'bout nice man like Brer Tarrypin.

"But bless grashus, honey! w'ilst all dis gwine on, Brer Fox wuz
stannin' at de back do' wid one year at de cat-hole lissenin'. Eave-
drappers don't hear no good er deyse'f, en de way Brer Fox wuz
'bused dat day wuz a caution.

"Bimeby Brer Fox stick his head in de do', en holler out:

'Good evenin', fokes, I wish you mighty well,' sezee, en wid dat he
make a dash for Brer Rabbit, but Miss Meadows en de gals dey
holler en squall, dey did, en Brer Tarrypin ho got ter scramblin'
roun' up dar on de shelf, en off he come, en blip he tuck Brer Fox
on de back er de head. Dis sorter stunted Brer Fox, en w'en he
gedder his 'membunce de mos' he seed wnz a pot er greens turnt
over in de fireplace, en a broke cheer. Brer Rabbit wuz gone, en
Brer Tarry-pin wnz gone, en Miss Meadows en de gals wuz gone.

"Where did the Rabbit go, Uncle Remus?" the little boy asked,
after a pause.

"Bless yo' soul, honey! Brer Rabbit he skint up de chimbly-dats
w'at turnt do pot er greens over. Brer Tarrypin, he crope under de
bed, he did, en got behime do cloze-chist, en Miss Meadows en de
gals, dey rim out in de yard.

"Brer Fox, he sorter look roun' en feel or de back er his head, whar
Brer Tarrypin lit, but he don't see no sine er Brer Rabbit. But de
smoke en de ashes gv~ine up de chimbly got de best er Brer
Rabbit, en bimeby he sneeze-huckychow!

"'Aha!' sez Brer Fox, sezee; 'youer dar, is you?' sezee. 'Well, I'm
gwineter smoke you out, ef it takes a mont'. Youer mine dis time,'
sezee. Brer Rabbit ain't Sayin' nuthin'.

"'Ain't you comin' down?' sez Brer Fox, sezee. Brer Rabbit ain't
Sayin' nuthin'. Den Brer Fox, he went out atter some wood, he did,
en w'en he come back he hear Brer Rabbit laughin'. 

"'W'at you laughin' at, Brer Rabbit?' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"'Can't tell you, Brer Fox,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee. "'Better tell, Brer
Rabbit,' sez Brer Fox, sezee. ""Tain't nuthin' but a box er money
somebody done gone en lef' up yer in de chink er de chimbly,' sez
Brer Rabbit, sezee.

'Don't Meeve you,' sez Brer Fox, sezee. "'Look up en see,' sez Brer
Rabbit, sezee, en w'en Brer Fox look up, Brer Rabbit spit his eyes
full er terbarker joose, he did, en Brer Fox, he make a break fer de
branch, en Brer Rabbit he come down en tole de ladies good-by.

"'How you git 'im off, Brer Rabbit?' sez Miss Meadows, sez she.

"'Who? me?' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee; 'w'y I des tuck en tole 'im dat
ef he didn't go 'long home en Stop playin' his pranks on spectubble
fokes, dat I'd take 'im out and th'ash 'im,' sezee."

"And what became of the Terrapin?" asked the little boy.

"Oh, well den!" exclaimed the old man, "chilluns can't speck ter
know all 'bout eve'ytbing 'fo' dey git some res'. Dem eyeleds er
yone wanter be propped wid straws dis minnit." 

XI MR. WOLF MAKES A FAILURE

"I LAY yo' ma got comp'ny," said Uncle Remus, as the little boy
entered the old man's door with a huge piece of mince-pie in his
hand, 'en ef she ain't got comp'ny, den she done gone en drap de
cubberd key som'ers whar you done run up wid it."

"Well, I saw the pie lying there, Uncle Remus, and I just thought
I'd fetch it out to you.

"Tooby sho, honey," replied the old man, regarding the child with
admiration. "Tooby sho, honey; dat changes marters. Chrismus
doin's is outer date, en dey ain't got no bizness layin' roun' loose.
Dish yer pie," Uncle Remus continued, holding it up and
measuring it with an experienced eye, "will gimme strenk fer ter
persoo on atter Brer Fox en Brer Rabbit en de udder creeturs w'at
dey roped in 'long wid um."

Here the old man paused, and proceeded to demolish the pie-a feat
accomplished in a very short time. Then he wiped the crumbs from
his beard and began:

"Brer Fox feel so bad, en he git so mad 'bout Brer Rabbit, dat he
dunner w'at ter do, en he look mighty down-hearted. Bimeby, one
day wiles he wuz gwine 'long de road, old Brer Wolf come up wid
'im. W'en dey done howdyin' en axin' atter one nudder's fambly
connexshun, Brer Wolf, he 'low, he did, dat der wuz sump'n wrong
wid Brer Fox, en Brer Fox, he low'd der wern't, en he went on en
laugh en make great terdo kaze Brer Wolf look like he spishun
sump'n. But Brer Wolf, he got mighty 1ong head, en he sorter
broach 'bout Brer Rabbit's kyar'ns on, kaze de way dat Brer Rabbit
'ceive Brer Fox done got ter be de talk er de naberhood. Den Brer
Fox en Brer Wolf dey sorter palavered on, dey did, twel bimeby
Brer Wolf he up'n say dat he done got plan fix fer ter trap Brer
Rabbit. Den Brer Fox say how. Den Brer Wolf up'n tell 'im dat de
way fer ter git de drap on Brer Rabbit wuz ter git 'im in Brer Fox
house. Brer Fox dun know Brer Rabbit uv ole, en he know dat
sorter game done wo' ter a frazzle, but Brer Wolf, he talk mighty
'swadin'.

"'How you gwine git 'im dar?' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"Fool 'im dar,' sez Brer Wolf, sezee.

"'Who gwine do de foolin'?' sez Brer Fox, sezee. 

"I'll do de foolin',' sez Brer Wolf, sezee, 'ef you'l do de gamin','
sezee.

"'How you gwine do it?' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"'You run 'long home, en git on de bed, en make like you dead, en
don't you say nothin' twel Brer Rabbit come en put his han's onter
you,' sez Brer Wolf, sezee, 'en ef we don't git 'im fer supper, Joe's
dead en Sars a widder,' sezee.

"Dis look like mighty nice game, en Brer Fox 'greed. So den he
amble off home, en Brer Wolf, he march off ter Brer Rabbit house.
W'en he got dar, hit look like nobody at home, but Brer Wolf he
walk up en knock on de do'-blam! Ham! Nobody come. Den he
lam aloose en knock 'gin-blim! blim!

"'Who dar?' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"Tr'en',' sez Brer Wolf.

"'Too menny fr'en's spiles de dinner,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee; 'w'ich
un's dis?' sezee. 

"'I fetch bad news, Brer Rabbit,' sez Brer Wolf, sezee.

Bad news is soon tole,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"By dis time Brer Rabbit done come ter de do', wid his head tied
up in a red hankcher.

Brer Fox died dis mornin',' sez Brer Wolf, sezee.

"'Whar yo' mo'nin' gown, Brer Wolf?' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"'Gwine atter it now,' sez Brer Wolf, sezee. 'I des call by fer ter
bring de news. I went down ter Brer Fox house little bit 'go, en dar
I foun' 'im stiff,' sezee.

"Den Brer Wolf lope off. Brer Rabbit sot down en scratch his
head, he did, en bimeby he say ter hisse'f dat he b'leeve he sorter
drap 'roun' by Brer Fox house fer ter see how de lan' lay. No sooner
said'n done. Up he jump, en out he went. W'en Brer Rabbit got
close ter Brer Fox house, all look lonesome. Den he went up
nigher. Nobody stirrin'. Den he look in, en dar lay Brer Fox stretch
out on de bed des es big ez life. Den Brer Rabbit make like he
talkin' to hisse'f.

"'Nobody 'roun' fer ter look atter Brer Fox-not even Brer Tukkey
Buzzard ain't come ter de funeri,' sezee. 'I hope Brer Fox ain't dead,
but I speck he is,' sezee. 'Even down ter Brer Wolf done gone en
lef' 'im. Hit's de busy season wid me, but I'll set up wid 'im. He
seem like he dead, yit he mayn't be,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee. 'W'en
a man go ter see dead fokes, dead fokes allers raises up der behime
leg en hollers, wahoo!' sezee.

"Brer Fox he stay still. Den Brer Rabbit he talk little louder:

"'Mighty funny. Brer Fox look like he dead, yit he don't do like he
dead. Dead fokes hists der behime leg en hollers wahoo! w'en a
man come ter see urn, sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"Sho' nuff, Brer Fox lif' up his foot en holler wahoo! en Brer
Rabbit he tear out de house like de dogs wnz atter 'im. Brer Wolf
mighty smart, but nex' time you hear furn 'im, honey, he'll be in
trouble. You des hole yo' breff'n wait." 

XII  MR. FOX TACKLES OLD MAN TARRYPIN

"ONE day," said Uncle Remus, sharpening his knife on the palm
of his hand-"one day Brer Fox strike up wid Brer Tarrypin right in
de middle er de big road. Brer Tarrypin done heerd 'im comm', en
he low ter hissef dat he'd sorter keep one eye open; but Brer Fox
wuz monstus perlite, en he open up de confab, he did, like he ain't
see Brer Tarrypin sence de las' freshit.

"'Heyo, Brer Tarrypin, whar you bin dis long-come-short?' sez
Brer Fox, sezee.

"'Lounjun 'roun', Brer Fox, lounjun 'roun',' sez Brer Tarrypin.

"'You don't look sprucy like you did, Brer Tarrypin,' sez Brer Fox,
sezee.

"'Lounjun 'roun' en suffer'n', sez Brer Tarrypin, sezee.

"Den de talk sorter run on like dis:

'W'at ail you, Brer Tarrypin? Yo' eye look mighty red,' sez Brer
Fox, sezee.

"'Lor', Brer Fox, you dunner w'at trubble is. You ain't bin lounjun
'roun' en suffer'n',' sez Brer Tarry-pin, sezee.

"'Bofe eyes red, en you look like you mighty weak, Brer Tarrypin,'
sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"'Lor', Brer Fox, you dunner w'at trubble is,' sez Brer Tarrypin,
sezee.

"'W'at ail you now, Brer Tarrypin?' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"'Tuck a walk de udder day, en man come long en sot de fiel'
a-fier. Lor', Brer Fox, you dunner w'at trubble is,' sez Brer
Tarrypin, sezee.

"'How you git out de fier, Brer Tarrypin?' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"'Sot en tuck it, Brer Fox,' sez Brer Tarrypin, sezee. 'Sot en tuck it,
en de smoke sif' in my eye, en de fier scorch my back,' sez Brer
Tarrypin, sezee.

"'Likewise hit bu'n yo' tail off,' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"'Oh, no, dar's de tail, Brer Fox,' sez Brer Tarry-pin, sezee, en wid
dat he oncuri his tail fum under de shell, en no sooner did he do
dat dan Brer Fox grab it, en holler out:

"'Oh, yes, Brer Tarrypin! Oh, yes! En so youer de man w'at lam me
on de head at Miss Meadows's is you? Youer in wid Brer Rabbit, is
you? Well, I'm gwineter out you.

"Brer Tarrypin beg en beg, but 'twan't no use. Brer Fox done been
fool so much dat he look like he termin' fer ter have Brer Tarrypin
haslett. Den Brer Tarrypin beg Brer Fox not fer ter drown 'im, but
Brer Fox ain't makin' no prommus, en den he beg Brer Fox fer ter
bu'n' 'im, kase he done useter fier, but Brer Fox don't say nutlun'.
Bimeby Brer Fox drag Brer Tarrypin off little ways blow de
spring-'ouse, en souze him under de water. Den Brer Tarrypin
begin fer ter holler:

"'Tu'n loose dat stump root en ketch holt er me-tu'n loose dat
stump root en ketch holt er me.'

"Brer Fox he holler back:

"'I ain't got holt er no stump root, en I is got holt er you.

"Brer Tarrypin he keep on holler'n:

"'Ketch holt er me-I'm a drownin'-I'm a drownin'-tu'n loose de
stump root en ketch holt er me.'

"Sho nuff, Brer Fox tu'n loose de tail, en Brer Tarrypin, he went
down ter de bottom-kerblunkity-blink!"

No typographical combination or description could do justice to
the guttural sonorousness-the peculiar intonation-which Uncle
Remus imparted to this combination. It was so peculiar, indeed,
that the little boy asked:

"How did he go to the bottom, Uncle Remus?"

"Kerblunkity-blink!"

"Was he drowned, Uncle Remus?"

"Who? Ole man Tarrypin? Is you drowndid w'en yo' ma tucks you
in de bed?"

"Well, no," replied the little boy, dubiously.

"Ole man Tarrypin 'wuz at home I tell you, honey.
Kerblinkity-blunk!"

XIII  THE AWFUL FATE OF MR. WOLF

UNCLE REMUS was half-soling one of his shoes, and his Miss
Sally's little boy had been handling his awls, his hammers, and his
knives to such an extent that the old man was compelled to assume
a threatening attitude; but peace reigned again, and the little boy
perched himself on a chair, watching Uncle Remus driving in
pegs.

"Folks w'at's allers pesterin' people, en bodderin' 'longer dat w'at
ain't dem, don't never come ter no good eend. Dar wuz Brer Wolf;
stidder mindin' un his own bizness, he hatter take en go in
pardnerships wid Brer Fox, en dey want skacely a minnit in de day
dat he want atter Brer Rabbit, en he kep' on en kep' on twel fus'
news you knowed he got kotch up widen he got kotch up wid
monstus bad."

"Goodness, Uncle Remus! I thought the Wolf let the Rabbit alone,
after he tried to fool him about the Fox being dead."

"Better lemme tell dish yer my way. Bimeby hit'll be yo' bed time,
en Miss Sally'll be a hollerin' atter you, en youil be a whimplin'
roun', en den Mars John'll fetch up de re'r wid dat ar strop w'at I
made fer im.

The child laughed, and playfully shook his fist in the simple,
serious face of the venerable old darkey, but said no more. Uncle
Remus waited awhile to be sure there was to be no other
demonstration, and then proceeded:

"Brer Rabbit ain't see no peace w'atsumever. He can't leave home
'cep' Brer Wolf 'ud make a raid en tote off some er de fambly. Brer
Rabbit b'ilt 'im a straw house, en hit wuz tored down; den he made
a house outen pine-tops, en dat went de same way; den he made
'im a bark house, en dat wuz raided on, en eve'y time he los' a
house he los' one er his chilluns. Las' Brer Rabbit got mad, he did,
en cust, en den he went off, he did, en got some kyarpinters, en dey
b'ilt 'im a plank house wid rock foundashuns. Atter dat he could
have some peace en quietness. He could go out en pass de time er
day 'wid his neighbors, en come back en set by de fier, en smoke
his pipe, en read de newspapers same like enny man w'at got a
fambly. He made a hole, he did, in de cellar whar de little Rabbits
could hide out w'en dar wuz much uv a racket in de neighborhood,
en de latch er de front do' kotch on de inside. Brer Wolf, he see
how de lan' lay, he did, en he lay low. De little Rabbits was mighty
skittish, but hit got so dat cole chills ain't run up Brer Rabbit's back
no mo' w'en he heerd Brer Wolf go gallopin' by.

"Bimeby, one day w'en Brer Rabbit wuz fixin' fer ter call on Miss
Coon, he heerd a monstrus fuss en clatter up de big road, en 'mos'
'fo' he could fix his years fer ter lissen, Brer Wolf run in de do'. De
little Rabbits dey went inter dere hole in de cellar, dey did, like
blowin' out a canule. Brer Wolf Wuz far'ly kivver'd wid mud, en
mighty nigh outer 'win'. 

"'Oh, do pray save me, Brer Rabbit!' sez Brer Wolf, sezee. 'Do
please, Brer Rabbit! de dogs is ater me, en dey'll t'ar me up. Don't
you year um comin'? Oh, do please save me, Brer Rabbit! Hide me
some'rs whar de dogs won't git me.'

"No quicker sed dan done.

"'Jump in dat big chist dar, Brer Wolf,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee;
'jump in dar en make yo'se'f at home.'

"In jump Brer Wolf, down come the led, en inter de hasp went de
hook, en dar Mr. Wolf wuz. Den Brer Rabbit went ter de
lookin'-glass, he did, en wink at hisse'f, en den he draw'd de
rockin'-cheer in front er de fier, he did, en tuck a hig chaw
terbarker."

"Tobacco, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy, incredulously.

"Rabbit terbarker, honey. You know dis yer life eviastin' w'at Miss
Sally puts 'mong de doze in de trunk; well, dat's rabbit terbarker.
Den Brer Rabbit sot dar long time, he did, turnin' his mine over en
wukken his thinkin' masheen. Bimeby he got up, en sorter stir
'roun'. Den Brer Wolf open up:

'Is de dogs all gone, Brer Rabbit?'

'Seem like I hear one un um smellin' roun' de chimbly-cornder des
now.'

"Den Brer Rabbit git de kittle en fill it full er water, en put it on de
fier.

"'W'at you doin' now, Brer Rabbit?'

"'I'm fixin fer ter make you a nice cup er tea, Brer Wolf.'

"Den Brer Rabbit went ter de cubberd en git de gimlet, en
commence for ter bo' little holes in de chistled.

"'W'at you doin' now, Brer Rabbit?'

"'I'm bo'in' little holes So you kin get bref, Brer Wolf.'

"Den Brer Rabbit went out en git some mo' wood, en fling it on de
fier.

"'W'at you doin' now, Brer Rabbit?'

"'I'm a chunkin' up de fier so you won't git cole, Brer Wolf.'

"Den Brer Rabbit went down inter de cellar en

fotch out all his chilluns.

"'W'at you doin' now, Brer Rabbit?'

"'I'm a tellin' my chilluns w'at a nice man you is, Brer Wolf.'

"En de chilluns, dey had ter put der han's on der moufs fer ter keep
fum laffin'. Den Brer Rabbit he got de kittle en commenced fer to
p0' de hot water on de chist-lid.

"'W'at dat I hear, Brer Rabbit?' "'You hear de win' a blowin', Brer
Wolf.' "Den de water begin fer ter sif' thoo. "'W'at dat I feel, Brer
Rabbit?' "'You feels de fleas a bitin', Brer Wolf.' "'Dey er bitin'
mighty hard, Brer Rabbit.' "'Tu'n over on de udder side, Brer Wolf.'
"'W'at dat I feel now, Brer Rabbit?' "'Still you feels de fleas, Brer
Wolf.'

"'Dey er eatin' me up, Brer Rabbit,' en dem wuz de las words er
Brer Wolf, kase de scaldin' water done de bizness.

"Den Brer Rabbit call in his neighbors, he did, en dey hilt a reg'lar
juberlee; en ef you go ter Brer Rabbit's house right now, I dunno
but w'at you'll fine Brer Wolfs hide hangin' in de back-po'ch, en all
bekaze he wuz so bizzy wid udder fo'kses doin's."

XIV MR. FOX AND THE DECEITFUL FROGS

WHEN the little boy ran in to see Uncle Remus the night after he
had told him of the awful fate of Brer Wolf, the only response to
his greeting was:

'I-doom-er-ker-kum-mer-ker!"

No explanation could convey an adequate idea of the intonation
and pronunciation Which Uncle Remus brought to bear upon this
wonderful word. Those who can recall to mind the peculiar
gurgling, jerking, liquid sound made by pouring water from a large
jug, or the sound produced by throwing several stones in rapid
succession into a pond of deep water, may be able to form a very
faint idea of the sound, but it can not be reproduced in print. The
littleeboy was astonished.

"What did you Say, Uncle Remus?"

"I-doom-er-ker-kum-mer-ker! I-doom-er-ker-kum mer-ker!"

"What is that?"

"Dat's Tarrypin talk, dat is. Bless yo' soul, honey," continued the
old man, brightening up, "w'en you git ole ez me-w'en you see w'at
I sees, en year w'at I years-de creeturs dat you can't talk wid 'llbe
mighty skase-dey will dat. W'y, ders er old gray rat w'at uses 'bout
yer, en time atter time he comes out W'en you all done gone ter
bed en sets up dar in de comder en dozes, en me en him talks by de
'our; en w'at dat old rat dunno ain't down in de spellin' book. Des
now, w'en you run in and broke me up, I wuz fetchin'into my mine
w'at Brer Tarrypin say ter Brer Fox w'en he turn 'im loose in de
branch."

"What did he say, Uncle Remus?"

"Dat w'at he said-I-doom-er-ker-kum-mer-ker! Brer Tarrypin wuz
at de bottom er de pon', en he talk back, he did, in bubbles-I-
doom-er-ker-kum-mer-ker! Brer Fox, he ain't sayin' nuthin', but
Brer Bull-Frog, settin' on de bank, he hear Brer Tarrypin, he did,
en he holler back:

"Jug-er-rum-kum-dum! Jug-er-rurn-kum-dum!'

"Den n'er Frog holler out:

'Knee-deep! Knee-deep!'

"Den ole Brer Bull-Frog, he holler back:

'Don'-you-ber-lieve-'im! Don't-you-berliev-'im!'

"Den de bubbles come up fum Brer Tarrypin:

"I-doom-er-ker-kum-mer-ker!'

"Den n'er Frog sing out:

'Wade in! Wade in!'

"Den ole Brer Bull-Frog talk thoo his ho'seness:

"Dar-you'll-fine-yo'-brudder!  Da:-you'll-fine-yo'-brudder!'

"Sho nuff, Brer Fox look over de bank, he did, en dar wuz n'er Fox
lookin' at 'im outer de water. Den he retch out fer ter shake han's,
en in he went, heels over head, en Brer Tarrypin bubble out:

"'I-doom-er-ker-kum-mer-ker!"'

"Was the Fox drowned, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy.

"He weren't zackly drowndid, honey," replied the old man, With an
air of cautious reserve. "He did manage fer ter scramble out, but a
little mo' en de Mud Turkle would er got 'im, en den he'd er bin
made hash un worril widout een'."

XV MR. FOX GOES A-HUNTING, BUT MR. RABBIT BAGS
THE GAME

"ATTER Brer Fox hear 'bout how Brer Rabbit done Brer Wolf,"
said Uncle Remus, scratching his head with the point of his awl,
'he 'low, he did, dat he better not be so brash, en he sorter let Brer
Rabbit 'lone. Dey wuz all time seein' one nudder, en 'bunnunce er
times Brer Fox could er nab Brer Rabbit, but eve'y time he got de
chance, his mine 'ud sorter rezume 'bout Brer Wolf, en he let Brer
Rabbit 'lone. Bimeby dey 'gun ter git kinder familious wid wunner
nudder like dey useter, en it got so Brer Fox'd call on Brer Rabbit,
en dey'd set up en smoke der pipes, dey would, like no ha'sh
feelin's 'd ever rested 'twixt um.

"Las', one day Brer Fox come 'long all rig out, en ax Brer Rabbit
fer ter go huntin' Wid 'im, but Brer Rabbit, he sorter feel lazy, en
he tell Brer Fox dat he got some udder fish fer ter fry. Brer Fox
feel mighty sorry, he did, but he say he bleeve he try his han' enny
how, en off he put. He wuz gone all day, en he had a monstus
streak er luck, Brer Fox did, en he bagged a sight er game. Bimeby,
to'rds de shank er de evenin', Brer Rabbit sorter stretch hisse'f, he
did, en low hit's mos' time fer Brer Fox fer ter git 'long home. Den
Brer Rabbit, he went'n mounted a stump fer ter see ef he could
year Brer Fox comin'. He ain't bin dar long, twel sho' fluff, yer
come Brer Fox thoo de woods, singing like a nigger at a frolic.
Brer Rabbit, he lipt down off'n de stump, he did, en lay down in de
road en make like he dead. Brer Fox he come 'long, he did, en see
Brer Rabbit layin' dar. He tu'n 'im over, he did, en 'zamine 'im, en
Say, sezee:

"'Dish yer rabbit dead. He look like he bin dead long time. He
dead, but he mighty fat. He de fattes' rabbit w'at I ever see, but he
bin dead too long. I feard ter take 'im home,' sezee.

"Brer Rabbit ain't sayin' nuthin'. Brer Fox, he sorter lick his chops,
but he Went on en lef' Brer Rabbit layin' in de road. Dreckly he
wnz outer sight, Brer Rabbit, he jump up, he did, en run roun' thoo
de Woods en git befo Brer Fox agin. Brer Fox, he come up, en dar
lay Brer Rabbit, periently cole en stiff. Brer Fox, he look at Brer
Rabbit, en he sorter study. Atter while he onslung his game-bag, en
Say ter hisse'f, sezee:

'Deze yer rabbits gwine ter was'e. I'll des 'bout leave my game yer,
en fli go back'n git dat udder rabbit, en fil make fokes ~eeve dat
I'm ole man Hunter fum Huntsville,' sezee.

"En wid dat he drapt his game en loped back up de road atter de
udder rabbit, en w'en he got outer sight, ole Brer Rabbit, he snatch
up Brer Fox game en put out fer home. Nex' time he see Brer Fox
he holler out:

"'What you kill de udder day, Brer Fox?' sezee.

"Den Brer Fox, he sorter koam his flank wid his tongue, en holler
back:

"'I kotch a han'ful er hard sense, Brer Rabbit,' sezee.

"Den ole Brer Rabbit, he laff, he did, en up en 'spon', sezee:

'Ef I'd a know'd you wuz atter dat, Brer Fox, I'd a loant you some er
mine,' sezee."

XVI OLD MR. RARRIT, HE'S A GOOD FISHERMAN

"BRER RABBrr en Brer Fox wuz like some chilluns w'at I knows
un," said Uncle Remus, regarding the little boy, who had come to
hear another story, with an affectation of great solemnity. "Bofe un
um wuz allers atter wunner nudder, a prankin' en a pester n 'roun',
but Brer Rabbit did had some peace, kaze Brer Fox done got
skitfish 'bout puttin' de clamps on Brer Rabbit. 

"One day, w'en Brer Rabbit, en Brer Fox, en Brer Coon, en Brer
B'ar, en a whole lot un um wuz clearin' up a new groun' fer ter
plant a roas'n'year patch, de sun gun ter git sorter hot, en Brer
Rabbit he got tired; but he didn't let on, kaze he 'fear'd de balance
un um'd call 'im lazy, en he keep on totin' off trash en pilin' up
bresh, twel bimeby he holler out dat he gotter brier in his han', en
den he take'n slip off, en hunt fer cool place fer ter res'. Atter w'ile
he come crosst a well wid a bucket hangin' in it.

"'Dat look cool,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'en cool I speck she is I'll
des 'bout git in dar en take a nap,' en wid dat in he jump, he did, en
he ain't no sooner fix hisse'f dan de bucket 'gun ter go down."

"Wasn't the Rabbit scared, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy.

"Honey, dey ain't been no wusser skeer'd beas' sence de worril
begin dan dish yer same Brer Rabbit. He fa'rly had a ager. He
know whar he cum fum, but he dunner whar he gwine. Dreckly he
feel de bucket hit de water, en dar she sot, but Brer Rabbit he keep
mighty still, kaze he dunner w'at minnit gwineter be de nex'. He
des lay dar en shuck en shiver.

"Brer Fox allers got one eye on Brer Rabbit, en w'en he slip off
fum de new groun', Brer Fox he sneak atter 'im. He know Brer
Rabbit wuz atter some projick er nudder, en he tuck'n crope off, he
did, en watch 'im. Brer Fox see Brer Rabbit come to de well en
stop, en den he see 'im jump in de bucket, en den, lo en beholes, he
see 'im go down outer sight. Brer Fox wuz de mos' 'stonish Fox dat
you ever laid eyes on. He sot off dar in de bushes en study en
study, but he don't make no head ner tails ter dis kinder bizness.
Den he say ter hisse'f, sezee:

"'Well, ef dis don't bang my times,' sezee, 'den Joe's dead en Sal's a
widder. Right down dar in dat well Brer Rabbit keep his money
hid, en ef 'tain't dat den he done gone en 'skiver'd a gole-mine, en
ef 'tain't dat, den I'm a gwineter see w'at's in dar,' sezee.

"Brer Fox crope up little nigher, he did, en lissen, but he don't year
no fuss, en he keep on gittin' nigher, en yit he don't year nuthin'.
Bimeby he git up close en peep down, but he don't see nuthin' en
he don't year nuthin'. All dis time Brer Rabbit mighty nigh skeer'd
outen his skin, en he fear'd fer ter move kaze de bucket might keel
over en spill him out in de water. W'ile he sayin' his pra'rs over like
a train er kyars runnm, ole Brer Fox holler out:

"'H eyo, Brer Rabbit! Who you wizzitin' down dar?' sezee.

"'Who? Me? Oh, I'm des a fishin', Brer Fox,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.
'I des say ter myse'f dat I'd sorter sprize you all wid a mess er fishes
fer dinner, en so here I is, en dar's de fishes. I'm a fishin' fer
suckers, Brer Fox,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"'Is dey many un um down dar, Brer Rabbit?' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"'Lots un um, Brer Fox; scoze en scoze un um. De water is natally
live wid um. Come down en he'p me haul um in, Brer Fox,' sez
Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"'How I gwinter git down, Brer Rabbit?'

Jump inter de bucket, Brer Fox. Hit'll fetch you down all safe en
soun'.'

"Brer Rabbit talk so happy en talk so sweet dat Brer Fox he jump
in de bucket, he did, en, ez he went down, co'se his weight pull
Brer Rabbit up.

W'en dey pass one nudder on de half-way growl', Brer Rabbit he
sing out:

"'Good-by, Brer Fox, take keer yo' doze, 
Fer dis-is de way de worril goes;
Some goes up en some goes down, 
You'll git ter de bottom all safe en soun'.' *1

"W'en Brer Rabbit got out, he gallop off en tole de fokes w'at de
well blong ter dat Brer Fox wuz down in dar muddyin' up de
drinkin' water, en den he gallop back ter de well, en holler down
ter Brer Fox:

"'Ye come a man wid a great big gun-W'en he haul you up, you
jump en run."'

"What then, Uncle  Remus?" asked the litfie boy, as the old man
paused.

In des 'bout half n'our, honey, bofe un urn wuz back in de new
groun' wukidri des like dey never heer'd er no well, ceppin' dat
eve'y now'n den Brer Rabbit'd bust out in er laff, en old Brer Fox,
he'd git a spell er de dry grins."

*1 As a Northern friend suggests that this story may be some-what
obscure, it may be as well to state ~at tile well is supposed to be
supplied with a rope over a wheel, or pulley, with a bucket at each
end.

XVII MR. RABBIT NIBBLES UP THE BUTTER

'"DE animils en de creeturs," said Uncle Remus, shaking his
coffee around in the bottom of his tin-cup, in order to gather up all
the sugar, 'dey kep' on gittin' mo' en mo' familious wid wunner
nudder, twel bimeby, 'twan't long 'fo' Brer Rabbit, en Brer Fox, en
Brer Possum got ter sorter bunchin' der perwishuns tergedder in de
same shanty. Atter w'ile de roof sorter 'gun ter leak, en one day
Brer Rabbit, en Brer Fox, en Brer Possum, 'semble fer ter see ef
dey can't kinder patch her up. Dey had a big day's work in front un
um, en dey fotch der dinner wid urn. Dey lump de vittles up in one
pile, en de butter w'at Brer Fox brung, dey goes en puts in de
spring-'ouse fer ter keep cool, en den dey went ter wuk, en 'twan't
long 'fo' Brer Rabbit stummuck 'gun ter sorter growl en pester 'im.
Dat butter er Brer Fox sot heavy on his mine, en his mouf water
eve'y time he 'member 'bout it. Present'y he say ter hisse'f dat he
bleedzd ter have a nip at dat butter, en den he lay his plans, he did.
Fus' news you know, w'ile dey wuz all wukkin' long, Brer Rabbit
raise his head quick en fling his years forrerd en holler out:

"'Here I is. W'at you want wid me?' en off he put like sump'n wuz
atter 'im.

"He sallied 'roun', ole Brer Rabbit did, en atter he make sho dat
nobody ain't foller'n un 'im, inter de spring-'ouse he bounces, en
dar he stays twel he git a bait er butter. Den he santer on back en
go to wuk.

"'Whar you bin?' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"'I hear my chilluns callin' me,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'en I hatter
go see w'at dey want. My ole 'oman done gone en tuck mighty
sick,' sezee.

"Dey wuk on twel bimeby de butter tas'e so good dat ole Brer
Rabbit want some mo'. Den he raise up his head, he did, en holler
out:

"'Heyo! Hole on! I'm a comin'!' en off he put.

"Dis time he stay right smart w'ile, en w'en he git back Brer Fox ax
him whar he bin. 

"'I been ter see my ole 'oman, en she's a sinkin',' sezee.

"Dreckly Brer Rabbit hear um callin' 'im ag'in en off he goes, en
dis time, bless yo' soul, he gits de butter out so clean dat he kin see
hisse'f in de bottom er de bucket. He scrape it clean en lick it dry,
en den he go back ter wuk lookin' mo' samer dan a nigger w'at de
patter-rollers bin had holt un.

"'How's yo' ole 'oman dis time?' sez Brer Fox, sezee. 

"I'm oblije ter you, Brer Fox,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'but I'm fear'd
she's done gone by now,' en dat sorter make Brer Fox en Brer
Possum feel in moanin' wid Brer Rabbit.

"Bimeby, w'en dinner-time come, dey all got out der vittles, but
Brer Rabbit keep on lookin' lonesome, en Brer Fox en Brer Possum
dey sorter rustle roun' fer ter see ef dey can't make Brer Rabbit feel
sorter splimmy."

"What is that, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy. "Sorter
splimmy-splammy, honey-sorter like he in a crowd-sorter like his
ole 'oman ain't dead ez she mout be. You know how fokes duz w'en
dey gits whar people's a moanin'."

The little boy didn't know, fortunately for him, and Uncle Remus
went on:

"Brer Fox en Brer Possum rustle roun', dey did, gittin out de vittles,
en bimeby Brer Fox, he say, sezee:

"'Brer Possurn, you run down ter de spring en fetch de butter, en fli
sail 'roun' yer en set de table,' sezee.

"Brer Possum, he lope off atter de butter, en dreckly here he come
lopin' back wid his years a trimblin' en his tongue a hangin' out.
Brer Fox, he holler out:

"'W'at de matter now, Brer Possum?' sezee.

"'You all better run yer, fokes,' sez Brer Possum, sezee. 'De las'
drap er dat butter done gone!'

"'Whar she gone?' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"'Look like she dry up,' sez Brer Possum, sezee.

"Den Brer Rabbit, he look sorter sollum, he did, en he up'n say,
sezee.

"'I speck dat butter melt in somebody mouf,' sezee. "Den dey went
down ter de spring wid Brer Possum, en sho nuff de butter done
gone. W'iles dey wuz sputin' over de wunderment, Brer Rabbit say
he see tracks all 'roun' dar, en he p'int out dat ef de~l all go ter
sleep, he kin ketch de chap w'at stole de butter. Den dey all lie
down en Brer Fox en Brer Possum dey soon drapt off ter sleep, but
Brer Rabbit he stay 'wake, en w'en de time come he raise up easy
en smear Brer Possum mouf wid de butter on his paws, en den he
run off en nibble up de bes' er de dinner w'at dey lef' layin' out, en
den he come back en wake up Brer Fox, en show 'im de butter on
Brer Possum mouf. Den dey wake up Brer Possum, en tell 'im
'bout it, but c'ose Brer Possum 'ny it ter de las'. Brer Fox, dough,
he's a kinder lawyer, en he argafy dis way-dat Brer Possum wuz de
fus one at de butter, en de fus one fer ter miss it, en mo'n dat. dar
hang de signs on his mouf. Brer Possum see dat dey got 'im
jammed up in a cornder, en den he up en say dat de way fer ter
ketch de man w'at stole de butter is ter b'il' a big bresh-heap en set
her afier, en all han's try ter jump over, en de one w'at fall in, den
he de chap w'at stole de butter. Brer Rabbit en Brer Fox dey
if bofe 'gree, dey did, en dey whirl in en b'il' de breshheap, en dey
b'il' her high en dey b'il' her wide, en den dey totch her off. W'en
she got ter blazin' up good, Brer Rabbit, he tuck de fus turn. He
sorter step back, en look 'roun' en giggle, en over he went mo'
samer dan a bird flyin'. Den come Brer Fox. He got back little
fudder, en spit on his han's, en lit out en made de jump, en he
come so nigh gittin' in dat de een' er his tail kotch afier. Ain't you
never see no fox, honey?" inquired Uncle Remus, in a tone that
implied both conciliation and informafion.

The little boy thought probably he had, but he wouldn't commit
himself.

"Well, den," continued the old man, "nex' time you see one un um,
you look right close en see ef de cen' er his tail ain't w'ite. Hit's des
like I tell you. Dey b'ars de skyar er dat bresh-heap down ter dis
day. Dey er marked-dat's w'at dey is-dey er marked."

"And what about Brother Possum?" asked the little boy.

"Ole Brer Possum, he tuck a runnin' start, he did, en he come
lumberin' 'long, en he lit-kerblam!-right in de middle er de fier, en
dat wuz de las' er ole Brer Possum."

"But, Uncle Remus, Brother Possum didn't steal the butter after
all," said the little boy, who was not at all satisfied with such
summary injustice.

"Dat w'at make I say w'at I duz, honey. In dis worril, lots er fokes
is gotter suffer fer udder fokes sins. Look like hit's mighty
onwrong; but hit's des dat away. Tribbalashun seem like she's a
waitin' roun' de cornder fer ter ketch one en all un us, honey."

XVIII MR. RABBIT FINDS HIS MATCH AT LAST

"Hrr look like ter me dat I let on de udder night dat in dem days
w'en de creeturs wuz santer'n 'roun' same like fokes, none un urn
wuz brash nuff fer ter ketch up wid Brer Rabbit," remarked Uncle
Remus, reflectively.

"Yes," replied the little boy, "that's what you said."

"Well, den," continued the old man with unction, "dar's whar my
'membunce gin out, kaze Brer Rabbit did git kotched up wid, en hit
cool 'im off like po'in' spring water on one er deze yer biggity
fices."

"How was that, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy.

"One day w'en Brer Rabbit wuz gwine lippityclippitin' down de
road, he meet up wid ole Brer Tarrypin, en atter dey pass de time
er day wid wunner nudder, Brer Rabbit, he 'low dat he wuz much
'blije ter rer Tarrypin fer de han' he tuck in de rumpus dat day
dowu at Miss Meadows's."

"When he dropped off of the water-shelf on the Fox's head,"
suggested the little boy.

"Dat's de same time, honey. Den Brer Tarrypin 'low dat Brer Fox
run mighty fas' dat day, but dat ef he'd er bin atter 'im stidder Brer
Rabbit, he'd er kotch 'im. Brer Rabbit say he could er kotch 'im
hisse'f but he didn't keer 'bout leavin' de ladies. Dey keep on
talkin', dey did, twel bimeby dey gotter 'sputin' 'bout w'ich wuz de
swif'es'. Brer Rabbit, he say he kin outrun Brer Tarrypin, en Brer
Tarrypin, he des vow dat he kin outrun Brer Rabbit. Up en down
dey had it, twel fus news you know Brer Tarrypin say he got a
fifty-dollar bill in de chink er de chimbly at home, en dat bill done
tole 'im dat he could beat Brer Rabbit in a fa'r race. Den Brer
Rabbit say he got a fifty-dollar bill w'at say dat he kin leave Brer
Tarry-pin so fur behime, dat he could sow barley ez he went long
en hit 'ud be ripe nuff fer ter cut by de time Brer Tarrypin pass dat
way.

'Enny how dey make de bet en put up de money, en old Brer Tukky
Buzzard, he wuz summonzd fer ter be de jedge, en de stakeholder;
en 'twan't long 'fo' all de 'rangements wuz made. De race wuz a
five-mile heat, en de groun' wuz medjud off, en at de een' er ev'ey
mile a pos' wuz stuck up. Brer Rabbit wuz ter run down de big
road, en Brer Tarrypin, he say he'd gallup thoo de woods. Fokes
tole 'im he could git long faster in de road, but ole Brer Tarrypin,
he know w'at he doin'. Miss Meadows en de gals en mos' all de
nabers got win' er de fun, en Wen de day wuz sot dey 'termin' fer
ter be on han'. Brer Rabbit he train hisse'f ev'ey day, en he skip
over de groun' des ez gayly ez a June cricket. Ole Brer Tarrypin, he
lay low in de swamp. He had a wife en th'ee chilluns, old Brer
Tarrypin did, en dey wuz all de ve'y spit en image er de ole man.
Ennybody w'at know one fum de udder gotter take a spy-glass, en
den dey er li'ble fer ter git fooled.

"Dat's de way marters stan' twel de day er de race, en on dat day,
ole Brer Tarrypn, en his ole 'oman, en his th'ee chilluns, dey got up
'fo' sun-up, en went ter de place. De ole 'oman, she tuck 'er stan'
nigh de fus' mile-pos', she did, en de chilluns nigh de udders, up ter
de las', en dar old Brer Tarrypin, he tuck his stan'. Bimeby, here
come de fokes: Jedge Buzzard, he come, en Miss Meadows en de
gals, dey come, en den yer come Brer Rabbit wid ribbons tied
'roun' his neck en streamin' fum his years. De fokes all went ter de
udder een' er de track fer ter see how dey come out. W'en de time
come Jedge Buzzard strut 'roun' en pull out his watch, en holler
out:

"'Gents, is you ready?'

"Brer Rabbit, he say 'yes,' en old Miss Tarrypin holler 'go' fum de
aidge er de woods. Brer Rabbit, he lit out on de race, en old Miss
Tarrypin, she put out for home. Jedge Buzzard, he riz en skimmed
long fer ter see dat de race wuz runned fa'r. W'en Brer Rabbit got
ter de fus' mile-pos' wunner de Tarrypin chilluns crawl out de
woods, he did, en make fer de place. Brer Rabbit, he holler out:

"'Whar is you, Brer Tarrypm?'

'Yer I come a bulgin',' sez de  Tarrypin, 

"Brer Rabbit so  glad he's ahead dat he put out harder dan ever, en
de Tarrypin, he make fer home. W'en he come ter de nex' pos',
nudder Tarrypin crawl out er de woods.

"'Whar is you, Brer Tarrypin?' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"'Yer I come a bilin',' sez de Tarrypin, sezee.

"Brer Rabbit, he lit out, he did, en come ter nex' pos', en dar wuz
de Tarrypin. Den he come ter nex', en dar wuz de Tarrypin. Den he
had one mo' mile fer ter run, en he feel like he gittin' bellust.
Bimeby, ole Brer Tarrypin look way off down de road en he see
Jedge Buzzard sailin' long en he know hit's time fer 'im fer ter be
up. So he scramble outen de woods, en roll 'cross de ditch, en
shuffle thoo de crowd er folks en git ter de mile-pos' en crawl
behime it. Bimeby, fus' news you know, yer come Brer Rabbit. He
look 'roun' en he don't see Brer Tarrypin, en den he squall out:

"'Gimme de money,  Brer Buzzard, Gimme de money!'

"Den  Miss Meadows en de gals, dey holler and laff fit ter kill
deyse'f, en ole Brer Tarrypin, he raise up fuin behime de
pos' en sez, sezee:

"Ef you'll gimme time fer ter ketch my breff, gents en ladies, one
en all, I speck fll finger dat money myse'f,' sezee, en sho nuff, Brer
Tarrypin tie de pu's 'roun' his neck en skaddle*1 off home."

"But, Uncle Remus," said the little boy, dolefully, "that was
cheating."

"Co'se, honey. De creeturs 'gun ter cheat, en den fokes tuck it up,
en hit keep on spreadin'. Hit mighty ketchin', en you mine yo' eye,
honey, dat somebody don't cheat you 'fo' yo' ha'r git gray ez de ole
nigger's."

*1 It may he interesting to note here that in all prohability the word
"skedaddle," about which there was some controversy during the
war, came from the Virginia negro's use of "skaddle," which is a
corruption of "scatter." The matter, however, is hardly worth
referring to.

XIX THE FATE OF MR. JACK SPARROW

"You'll tromple on dat bark twel hit won't be fitten fer ter fling
'way, let 'l one make hoss-collars out'n," said Uncle Remus, as the
little boy came run-fling into his cabin out of the rain. All over the
floor long strips of "wahoo" bark were spread, and these the old
man was weaving into horse-collars.

"I'll sit down, Uncle Remus," said the little boy.

"Well, den, you better, honey," responded the old man, "kaze I
'spizes fer ter have my wahoo trompled on. Ef 'twuz shucks, now,
hit mout be diffunt, but I'm a gittin' too ole fer ter be projickin'
longer shuck collars."

For a few minutes the old man went on with his work, but with a
solemn air altogether unusual. Once or twice he sighed deeply, and
the sighs ended in a prolonged groan, that seemed to the little boy
to be the result of thc most unspeakable mental agony. He knew by
experience that he had done something which failed to meet the
approval of Uncle Remus, and he tried to remember what it was,
so as to frame an excuse; but his memory failed him. He could
think of nothing he had done calculated to stir Uncle Remus's
grief. He was not exactly seized with remorse, but he was
very uneasy. Presently Uncle Remus looked at him in a sad and
hopeless way) and asked:

"W'at dat long rigmarole you bin tellin' Miss Sally 'bout yo' little
brer dis mawnin?"

"Which, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy, blushing guiltily.

"Dat des w'at I'm a axin' un you now. I hear Miss Sally say she's a
gwineter stripe his jacket, en den I knowed you bin tellin' on 'im."

"Well, Uncle Remus, he was pulling up your onions, and then he
went and flung a rock at me, said the child, plaintively.

"Lemme tell you dis," said the old man, laying down the section of
horse-collar he had been plaiting, and looking hard at the little
boy-"lemme tell you dis-der ain't no way fer ter make tattlers en
tailb'arers turn out good. No, dey ain't. I bin mixin' up wid fokes
now gwine on eighty year, en I ain't seed no tattler come ter no
good een'. Dat I ain't. En ef ole man M'thoozlum wuz livin' clean
twel yit, he'd up'n tell you de same. Sho ez youer settin' dar. You
'member w'at 'come er de bird w'at went tattlin' 'roun' 'bout Brer
Rabbit?"

The little boy didn't remember, but he was very anxious to know,
and he also wanted to know what kind of a bird it was that so
disgraced itself.

"Hit wuz wuner dese yer uppity little Jack Sparrers, I speck," said
the old man; "dey wuz allers  bodder'n' longer  udder fokes's
bizness, en dey keeps at it down ter dis day-peckin' yer, en pickin'
dar, en scratchin' out yander. One day, atter he bin fool by ole Brer
Tarrypin, Brer Rabbit wuz settin' down in de woods studdyin' how
he wuz gwineter git even.  He  feel mighty lonesome, en he feel
mighty mad, Brer Rabbit did. Tain't put down in de tale, but I
speck he cusst en r'ar'd 'roun' considerbul. Leas'ways, he wuz settin'
out dar by hisse'f, en dar he sot, en study en study, twel bimeby he
jump up en holler out:

"'Well, dog-gone my cats ef I can't gallop 'roun' ole Brer Fox, en
I'm gwineter do it. Ill show Miss Meadows en de gals dat I'm de
boss er Brer Fox,' sezee.

"Jack Sparrer up m de tree, he hear Brer Rabbit, he did, en he sing
out:

"'I'm gwine tell Brer Fox! I'm gwine tell Brer Fox!
Chick-a-biddy-win'-a-blowin'-acuns-fallin'! I'm gwine tell Brer
Fox!"'

Uncle Remus accompanied the speech of the bird with a peculiar
whistling sound in his throat, that was a marvelous imitation of a
sparrow's chirp, and the little boy clapped his hands with delight,
and insisted on a repetition.

"Dis kinder tarrify Brer Rabbit, en he skasely know w'at he gwine
do; but bimeby he study ter hisse'f dat de man w'at see Brer Fox
fus wuz boun' ter have de inturn, en den he go hoppin' off to'rds
home. He didn't got fur w'en who should he meet but Brer Fox, en
den Brer Rabbit, he open up:

"'W'at dis twix' you en me, Brer Fox?' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee. 'I
hear tell you gwine ter sen' me ter 'struckshun, en nab my fambly,
en 'Stroy my shanty,' sezee.

"'Den Brer Fox he git mighty mad.

'Who bin tellin' you all dis?' sezee.

"Brer Rabbit make like he didn't want ter tell, but Brer Fox he 'sist
en 'sist, twel at las' Brer Rabbit he up en tell Brer Fox dat he hear
Jack Sparrer say all dis.

"'Co'se,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'w'en Brer Jack Sparrer tell me dat
I flew up, I did, en I use some langwidge w'ich I'm mighty glad dey
weren't no ladies 'round' nowhars so dey could hear me go on,
sezee.

"Brer Fox he sorter gap, he did, en say he speck he better be
sa'nter'n on. But, bless yo' soul, honey, Brer Fox ain't sa'nter fur, 'fo'
Jack Sparrer ffipp down on a 'simmon-bush by de side er de road,
en holler out:

"'Brer Fox! Oh, Brer Fox!-Brer Foir "Brer Fox he des sorter canter
long, he did, en make like he don't hear 'im. Den Jack  Sparrer up'n
sing out agin:

'Brer Fox! Oh, Brer Fox! Hole on, Brer Fox! I got some news fer
you. Wait Brer Fox! Hit'll 'stonish you.'

"Brer Fox he make like he don't see Jack Sparrer, ner needer do he
hear 'im, but bimeby he lay down by de road, en sorter stretch
hisse'f like he fixin' fer ter nap. De tattlin' Jack Sparrer he flew'd
'long, en keep on callin' Brer Fox, but Brer Fox, he ain't sayin'
nuthin'. Den little Jack Sparrer, he hop down on de groun' en
flutter 'roun' 'mongst de trash. Dis sorter 'track Brer Fox 'tenshun,
en he look at de tattlin' bird, en de bird he keep on callin':

'I got sump'n fer ter tell you, Brer Fox.'

"'Git on my tail, little Jack Sparrer,' sez Brer Fox, sezee, 'kaze I'm
de'f in one year, en I can't hear out'n de udder. Git on my tail,'
sezee.

"Den de little bird he up'n hop on Brer Fox's tail.

"'Git on my back, little Jack Sparrer, kaze I'm de'f in one year en I
can't hear out'n de udder.'

"Den de little bird hop on his back.

"'Hop on my head, little Jack Sparrer, kaze I'm de'f in bofe years.

"Up hop de little bird.

"'Hop on my toof, little Jack Sparrer, kaze I'm de'f in one year en I
can't hear out'n de udder.'

"De tattlin' little bird hop on Brer Fox's toof, en den-"

Here Uncle Remus paused, opened wide his mouth and closed it
again in a way that told the whole story. *1

"Did the Fox eat the bird all-all-up?" asked the little boy.

"Jedge B'ar come long nex' day," replied Uncle Remus, "en he fine
some fedders, en fum dat word went roun' dat ole man Squinch
Owl done kotch nudder watzizname."

*1 An Atlanta friend heard this story in Florida, but an alligator
was substituted for the fox, and a little boy for the rabbit. There is
another version in which the impertinent gosling goes to tell the
fox something her mother has said, and is caught; and there may
be other versions. I have adhered to the middle Georgia version,
which is characteristic enough. It may be well to state that there
are different versions of all the stories-the shrewd narrators of the
mythology of the old plantation adapting themselves with ready
tact to the years, tastes, and expectations of thefr juvenile
audiences.

XX HOW MR. RABBIT SAVED HIS MEAT

"ONE time," said Uncle Remus, whetting his knife slowly and
thoughtfully on the palm of his hand, and gazing reflectively in the
fire-"one   time Brer Wolf-"

"Why, Uncle Remus!" the little boy broke in, "I thought you said
the Rabbit scalded the Wolf to death a long time ago."

The old man was fairly caught and he knew it; but this made little
difference to him. A frown gathered on his usually serene brow as
he turned his gaze upon the child-a frown in which both scorn and
indignation were visible. Then all at once he seemed to regain
control of himself. The frown was chased away by a look of
Christian resignation.

"Dar now! W'at I tell you?" he exclaimed as if addressing a
wituess concealed under the bed. "Ain't I done tole you so? Bless
grashus! ef chilluns ain't gittin' so dey knows mo'n ole fokes, en
dey'll spute longer you en spute longer you, ceppin der ma call
urn, w'ich I speck twon't be long 'fo' she will, en den Ill set yere by
de chimbly-coruder en git some peace er mine. W'en ole Miss wuz
livin'," continued the old man, still addressing some imaginary
person, 'hit 'uz mo'n enny her ehilluns 'ud dast ter do ter come
'sputin' longer me,: en Mars John'll tell you de same enny day you
ax 'im."

"Well, Uncle Remus, you know you said the Rabbit poured hot
water on the Wolf and killed him," said the little boy.

The old man pretended not to hear. He was engaged in searching
among some scraps of leather under his chair, and kept on talking
to the imaginary person. Finally, he found and drew forth a nicely
plaited whip-thong with a red snapper all waxed and knotted.

"I wuz fixin' up a wi'p fer a little chap," he continued, with a sigh,
"but, bless grashus! 'fo' I kin git 'er done) de little chap done grow'd
up twel he know mo'n I duz."

The child's eyes filled with tears and his lips began to quiver, but
he said nothing; whereupon Uncle Remus immediately melted.

"I 'clar' to goodness," he said, reaching out and taking the little boy
tenderly by the hand, "ef you ain't de ve'y spit en image er ole Miss
Wen I brung 'er de las' news er de war. Hit's des like skeerin' up a
ghos' w'at you ain't fear'd un."

Then there was a pause, the old man patting the little child's hand
caressingly.

"You ain't mad, is you, honey?" Uncle Remus asked finally, "kaze
ef you is, I'm gwine out yere en butt my head 'gin de do' jam'."

But the little boy wasn't mad. Uncle Remus had conquered him
and he had conquered Uncle Remus in pretty much the same way
before. But it was some time before Uncle Remus would go on
with the story. He had to be coaxed. At last, however, he settled
himself back in the chair and began:

"Co'se, honey, hit mout er bin ole Brer Wolf, er hit mout er bin er
n'er Brer Wolf; it mout er bin 'fo' he got kotch up wid, er it mont er
bin atterwards. Ez de tale wer gun to me des dat away I gin it unter
you. One time Brer Wolf wnz comm' long home fum a fishin'
frolic. He s'anter long de road, he did, wid his string er fish 'cross
his shoulder, wen fus news you know ole Miss Pa'tridge, she hop
outer de bushes en flutter long right at Brer Wolf nose. Brer Wolf
he say ter hisse'f dat ole Miss Pa'tridge tryin' fer ter toll 'im 'way
fum her nes', en wid dat he lay his fish down en put out inter de
bushes whar ole Miss Pa'tridge come fum, en 'bout dat time Brer
Rabbit, he happen long. Dar wuz de fishes, en dar wuz Brer
Rabbit, en w'en dat de case w'at you speck a sorter innerpen'ent
man like Brer Rabbit gwine do? I kin tell you dis, dat dem fishes
ain't stay whar Brer Wolf put um at, en w'en Brer Wolf come back
dey wuz gone.

"Brer Wolf, he sot down en scratch his head, he  did,  en study en
study, en den hit sorter rush inter his mine dat Brer Rabbit bin
'long dar, en den Brer Wolf, he put out fer Brer Rabbit house, en
w'en he git dar he hail 'im. Brer Rabbit, he dunno nuthin' tall 'bout
no fishes. Brer Wolf he up'n say he bleedzd ter bleeve Brer Rabbit
got dem fishes. Brer Rabbit 'ny it up en down, but Brer Wolf stan'
to it dat Brer Rabbit got dem fishes. Brer Rabbit, he say dat if Brer
Wolf b'leeve he got de fishes, den he give Brer Wolf lief fer ter kill
de bes' cow he got. Brer Wolf, he tuck Brer Rabbit at his word, en
go off ter de pastur' en drive up de cattle en kill Brer Rabbit bes'
cow.

"Brer Rabbit, he hate mighty bad fer ter lose his cow, but he lay his
plans, en he tell his chilluns dat he gwineter have dat beef yit. Brer
Wolf, he bin tuck up by de patter-rollers 'fo' now, en he mighty
skeerd un um, en fus news you know, yer come Brer Rabbit
hollerin' en tellin' Brer Wolf dat de patter-rollers comm.

You run en hide, Brer Wolf,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'en I'll stay yer
en take keer er de cow twel you gits back,' sezee.

"Soon's Brer Wolf hear talk er de patter-rollers, he scramble off
inter de underbrush like he bin shot out'n a gun. En he want mo'n
gone 'fo' Brer Rabbit, he whirl in en skunt de cow en salt de hide
down, en den he tuck'n cut up de kyarkiss en stow it 'way in de
smoke-'ouse, en den he tuck'n stick de een' er de cow-tail in de
groun'. Atter he gone en done all dis, den Brer Rabbit he squall out
fer Brer Wolf:

'Run yer, Brer Wolf! Run yer! Yo' cow gwine in de groun'! Run
yer!'

"W'en ole Brer Wolf got dar, w'ich he come er scootin', dar wuz
Brer Rabbit horin' on ter de cow-tail, fer ter keep it fum gwine in
de groun'. Brer Wolf, he kotch holt, en dey 'gin a pull er two en up
come de tail. Den Brer Rabbit, he wink his off eye en Say, sezee:

"'Dar! de tail done pull out en de cow gone,' sezee. "But Brer Wolf
he wer'n't de man fer ter give it up dat away, en he got 'irn a spade,
en a pick-axe, en a shovel, en he dig en dig fer dat cow twel diggin'
wuz pas' all endu'unce, en ole Brer Rabbit he sot up dar in his front
po'ch en smoke his seegyar. Eve'y time ole Brer Wolf stuck de
pick-axe in de clay, Brer Rabbit, he giggle ter his chilluns:

"'He diggy, diggy, diggy, but no meat dar! He diggy, diggy, diggy,
but no meat dar!'

"Kase all de tiine de cow wuz layin' pile up in his smoke-'ouse, en
him en his chilluns wuz eatin' fried beef an inguns eve'y time dey
mouf water.

"Now den, honey, you take dis yer w'ip," continued the old man,
twining the leather thong around the little boy's neck, "en scamper
up ter de big 'ouse en tell Miss Sally fer ter gin you some un it de
flex' time she fine yo' tracks in de sugar-bairl."

XXI MR. RABBIT MEETS HIS MATCH AGMN

"DERE wuz nudder man dat sorter play it sharp on Brer Rabbit,"
said Uncle Remus, as, by some mysterious process, he twisted a
hog's bristle into the end of a piece of thread-an operation which
the little boy watched with great interest. "In dem days," continued
the old man, "de creeturs kyar'd on marters same ez fokes. Dey
went inter fahmin', en I speck ef de troof wuz ter come out, dey
kep' sto', en had der camp-meetin' times en der bobbycues' w'en de
wedder wuz 'greeble."

Uncle Remus evidently thought that the little boy wouldn't like to
hear of any further discomfiture of Brer Rabbit, who had come to
be a sort of hero, and he was not mistaken.

"I thought the Terrapin was the only one that fooled the Rabbit,"
said the little boy, dismally.

"Hit's des like I tell you, honey. Dey ain't no smart man, 'cep' w'at
dey's a smarter. Ef ole Brer Rabbit hadn't er got kotch up wid, de
nabers 'ud er took 'im for a h'ant, en in dem times dey bu'nt witches
'fo' you could squinch yo' eyeballs. Dey did dat."

"Who fooled the Rabbit this time?" the little boy asked.

When Uncle Remus had the bristle "sot" in the thread, he
proceeded with the story:

"One time Brer Ra'bbit en ole Brer Buzzard 'cluded dey'd sorter go
snacks, en crap tergedder. Hit wuz a mighty good year, en de truck
tu'n out monstus well, but bimeby, w'en de time come fer dividjun,
hit come ter light dat ole Brer Buzzard ain't got nuthin'. De crap
wuz all gone, en dey want nuthin' dar fer ter show fer it. Brer
Rabbit, he make like he in a wuss flx'n Brer Buzzard, en he mope
'roun', he did, like he fear'd dey gwineter sell 'im out.

"Brer Buzzard, he ain't sayin' nuthin', but he keep up a monstus
thinkin', en one day he come 'long en holler en tell Brer Rabbit dat
he done fine rich gole-mine des 'cross de river.

"'You come en go longer me, Brer Rabbit,' sez Brer Tukky
Buzzard, sezee. 'Ill scratch en you kin grabble, en 'tween de two un
us well make short wuk er dat gole-mine,' sezee.

"Brer Rabbit, he wuz high up fer de job, but he study en study, he
did, how he gwinter git 'cross de water, kaze ev'y time he git his
foot wet all de fambly kotch cole. Den he up'n ax Brer Buzzard
how he gwine do, en Brer Buzzard he up'n say dat he kyar Brer
Rabbit 'cross, en wid dat ole Brer Buzzard, he squot down, he did,
en spread his wings, en Brer Rabbit, he mounted, en up dey riz."
There was a pause.

"What did the Buzzard do then?" asked the little boy.

"Dey riz," continued Uncle Remus, "en w'en dey lit, dey lit in de
top er de highest sorter pine, en de pine w'at dey lit in wuz growin'
on er ilun, en de ilun wuz in de middle er de river, wid de deep
water runnin' all 'roun'. Dey ain't mo'n lit 'fo' Brer Rabbit, he know
w'ich way de win' 'uz blowin', en by de time ole Brer Buzzard got
hisse'f ballunce on a lim', Brer Rabbit, he up'n say, sezee:

W'iles we er res'n here, Brer Buzzard, en bein's you bin so good, I
got sump'n fer ter tell you,' sezee. 'I got a gole-mine er my own,
one w'at I make myse'f, en I speck we better go back ter mine 'fo'
we bodder 'longer yone, sezee.

"Den ole Brer Buzzard, he laff, he did, twel he shake, en Brer
Rabbit, he sing out:

"Hole on, Brer Buzzard! Don't flop yo' wings w'en you laff, kaze
den if you duz, sump'n 'ill drap fum up yer, en my gole-mine won't
do you no good, en needer will yone do me no good.'

"But 'fo' dey got down furn dar, Brer Rabbit done tole all 'bout de
crap, en he hatter promeus fer ter 'vide fa'r en squar. So Brer
Buzzard, he kyar 'im back, en Brer Rabbit he walk weak in de
knees a mont' atterwuds."

XXII A STORY ABOUT THE LITTLE RABBITS

"FINE um whar you will en w'en you may," remarked Uncle
Remus with emphasis, "good chilluns allers gits tuck keer on. Dar
wuz Brer Rabbit's chilluns; dey minded der daddy en mammy
furn day's een' ter day's een'. W'cn ole man Rabbit say scoot,' dey
scooted, en w'en ole Miss Rabbit say 'scat,' dey scatted. Dey did
dat. En dey kep der doze clean, en dey ain't had no smut on der
nose nudder."

Involuntarily the hand of the little boy went up to his face, and he
scrubbed the end of his nose with his coat-sleeve.

"Dey wuz good chilluns," continued the old man, heartily, "en ef
dey hadn't er bin, der wuz one time w'en dey wouldn't er bin no
little rabbits-na'er one. Dat's w'at."

"What time was that, Uncle Remus?" the little boy asked.

"De time w'en Brer Fox drapt in at Brer Rabbit house, en didn't
foun' nobody dar ceppin' de little Rabbits. Ole Brer Rabbit, he wnz
off some'rs raiding on a collard patch, en ole Miss Rabbit she wuz
tendin' on a quiltin' in de naberhood, en wiles de little Rabbits wuz
playin' hidin'-switch, in drapt Brer Fox. Dc little Rabbitg wuz so fat
dat dey fa'rly make his mouf water, but he 'member 'bout Brer
Wolf, en he skeered fer ter gobble urn up ceppin' he got some
skuse. De little Rabbits, dey mighty skittish, en dey sorter huddle
deyse'f up tergedder en watch Brer Fox motions. Brer Fox, he sot
dar en study w'at sorter skuse he gwineter make up. Bimeby he see
a great big stalk er sugar-cane stan'in' up in de coruder, en he cle'r
up his th'oat en talk biggity:

"'Yer! you young Rabs dar, sail 'roun' yer en broke mc a piece er
dat sweetnin'-tree,' sezee, en den he koff.

"De little Rabbits, dey got out de sugar-cane, dey did, en dey rastle
wid it, en sweat over it, but twan't no  use.  Dey couldn't  broke it.
Brer Fox, he make like he ain't  watchin', but he keep on holler'n:

"'Hurry up dar, Rabs! I'm a waitin' on you.

"En de little Rabbits, dey hustle 'roun' en rasfle wid it, but they
couldn't broke it. Bimeby dey hear little bird singin' on top er de
house, en de song w'at de little hird sing wuz dish yer.

"'Take yo' toofies en gnyaw it, 
Take yo' toofies en saw it, 
Saw it en yoke it, 
En den you kin broke it.'

"Den de little Rabbits, dey git mighty glad, en dey guyawed de
cane mos' 'fo' 'ole Brer Fox could git his legs oncrosst, en w'en dey
kyard 'im de cane, Brer Fox, he sot dar en study how he gwineter
make some mo' skuse fer nabbin' un um, en bimeby he git up en git
down de sifter w'at wuz hangin' on de wall, en holler out:

"'Come yer, Rabs! Take dish yer sifter, en run down't de spring en
fetch me some fresh water.'

"De little Rabbits, dey run down't de spring, en try ter dip up de
water wid de sifter, but co'se hit all run out, en hit keep on runnin'
out, twell bimeby de little Rabbits sot down en 'gun ter cry. Den de
little bird settin' up in de tree he begin fer ter sing, en dish yer's de
song w'at he sing:

"'Sifter hole water same ez a tray,
Ef you fill it wid moss en dob it wid clay;
De Fox git madder de longer you stay-
Fill it wid moss en dob it wid clay.'

"Up dey jump, de little Rabbits did, en dey fix de sifter so 'twon't
leak, en den dey kyar de water ter ole 

Brer Fox. Den Brer Fox he git mighty mad, en p'int out a great big
stick er wood, en tell de little Rabbits fer ter put dat on de fier. De
little chaps dey got 'roun' de wood, dey did, en dey hF at it so hard
twel dey could see der own sins, but de wood ain't budge. Den dey
hear de little bird singin', en dish yer's de song w'at he sing:

"'Spit in yo' han's en tug it en toll it,
En git behine it, en push it, en pole it; 
Spit in yo' han's en r'ar back en roll it.'

"En des 'bout de time dey got de wood on de fier, der daddy, he
come skippin' in, en de little bird, he flew'd away. Brer Fox, he
seed his game wuz up, en 'twan't long 'fo' he make his skuse en
start fer ter go.

"'You better Stay en take a snack wid me, Brer Fox,' sez Brer
Rabbit, sezee. 'Sence Brer Wolf done quite comin' en settin' up wid
me, I gittin' so I feels right lonesome dese long nights,' sezee.

"But Brer Fox, he button up his coat-collar tight en des put out fer
home. En dat w'at you better do, honey, kaze I see Miss Sally's
shadder sailin' backerds en for'ds 'fo' de winder, en de fus' news
you know she'll be spectin' un you.

XXIII MR. RABBIT AND AIR. BEAR

"DAR wuz one season7 said Uncle Remus, pulling thoughtfully at
his whiskers, "w'en Brer Fox say to hisse'f dat he speck he better
whirl in en plant a goober-patch, en in dem days, mon, hit wnz
tech en go. De wud wern't mo'n out'n his mouf 'fo' de groun' 'uz
brok'd up en de goobers 'uz planted. Ole Brer Rabbit, he sot off en
watch de motions, he did, en he sorter shet one eye en sing to his
chilluns:

"'Ti-yi! Tungalee!
I eat um pea, I pick urn pea.
Hit grow in de groun', hit grow so free;
Ti-yi! dem goober pea.

"Sho' 'nuff w'en de goobers 'gun ter ripen up, eve'y time Brer Fox
go down ter his patch, he fine whar somebody bin grabblin'
'mongst de vines, en he git mighty mad. He sorter speck who de
somebody is, but ole Brer Rabbit he cover his tracks so cute dat
Brer Fox dunner how ter ketch 'im. Bimeby, one day Brer Fox take
a walk all roun' de groun'-pea patch, en 'twan't long 'fo' he fine a
crack in de fence whar de rail done bin rub right smoove, en right
dar he sot 'im a trap. He tuck'n ben' down a hick'ry saplin', growin'
in de fence-cornder, en tie one een' un a plow4ine on de top, en in
de udder een' he fix a loop-knot, en dat he fasten wid a trigger right
in de crack. Nex' mawnin' w'en ole Brer Rabbit come slip-pin' 'long
en crope thoo de crack, de loop-knot kotch 'im behime de folegs,
en de saplin' flew'd up, en dar he wuz 'twix' de heavens en de yeth.
Dar he swulig, cn he fear'd he gwineter fall, en he fear'd he wer'n't
gwineter fall. W'ile he wuz a fixin' up a tale fer Brer Fox, he hear a
lumberin' down de road, en present'y yer cum ole Brer B'ar arriblin'
'long film whar he bin takin' a bee-tree. Brer Rabbit, he hail 'im:

"'Howdy, Brer B'ar!'

"Brer Ba'r, he look 'roun en bimeby he see Brer Rabbit swingin'
fum de saplin', en he holler out:

"'Heyo, Brer Rabbit! How you come on dis mawnin'?'

"'Much oblije, I'm middlin', Brer B'ar,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"Den Brer B'ar, he ax Brer Rabbit w'at he doin' up dar in de
elements, en Brer Rabbit, he up'n say he makin' dollar minnit. Brer
B'ar, he say how. Brer Rabbit say he keepin' crows out'n Brer Fox's
groun' pea patch, en den he ax Brer B'ar ef he don't wanter make
dollar minnit, kaze he got big fambly er ohil-luns fer to take keer
un, en den he make sech nice skeercrow. Brer B'ar 'low dat he take
de job, en den Brer Rabbit show 'im how ter ben' down de saplin',
en 'twan't long 'fo' Brer B'ar wuz swingin' up dar in Brer Rabbit
place. Den Brer Rabbit, he put out fer Brer Fox house, en w'en he
got dar he sing out:

"'Brer Fox! Oh, Brer Fox! Come out yer, Brer Fox, en Ill show you
de man w'at bin stealin' yo' goobers.'

"Brer Fox, he grab up his walkin'-stick, en bofe un urn went runnin'
back down ter der goober-patch, en w'en dey got dar, sho 'nuff, dar
wuz ole Brer B'ar.

"'Oh, yes! youer kotch, is you?' sez Brer Fox, en 'fo' Brer B'ar could
'splain, Brer Rabbit he Jump up en down, en holler out:

"'Hit 'im in de mouf, Brer Fox; hit 'im in do mouf'; en Brer Fox, he
draw back wid de walkin'cane, en blip he tuck 'im, en eve'y time
Brer B'ar'd try ter 'splain, Brer Fox'd shower down on him.

"W'iles all dis 'uz gwine on, Brer Rabbit, he slip off en git in a
mud-hole en des lef' his eyes stickin' out, kaze he know'd dat Brer
B'ar'd be a comin' atter 'im. Sho 'nuff, bimeby here come Brer B'ar
down de road, en w'en he git ter de mud-hole, he Say:

Howdy, Brer Frog; is you seed Brer Rabbit go by yer?'

He des gone by,' sez Brer Rabbit, en ole man B'ar tuck off down de
road like a skeer'd mule, en Brer Rabbit, he come out en dry hisse'f
in de sun, en go home ter his fambly same ez enny udder man.

"The Bear didn't catch the Rabbit, then?" inquired the little boy,
sleepily.

"Jump up film dar, honey!" exclaimed Uncle Remus, by way of
reply. "I ain't got no time fer ter be settin' yer proppin' yo' eyeleds
open."

XXIV MR. BEAR CATCHES OLD MR. BULL-FROG

'WELL, Uncle Remus," said the little boy, count-mg to see if he
hadn't lost a marble somewhere, "the Bear didn't catch the Rabbit
after all, did he?"

"Now you talkin', honey," replied the old man, his earnest face
breaking up into little eddies of smiles- now you talkin' sho. 'Tain't
bin proned inter no Brer B'ar fer ter kotch Brer Rabbit. Hit sorter
like settin' a mule fer ter trap a hummin'-bird. But Brer B'ar, he
tuck'n got hisse'f inter some mo' trubble, w'ich it look like it
mighty easy. Ef folks could make der livin' longer gittin' inter
trubble," continued the old man, looking curiously at the little boy,
"ole Miss Favers wouldn't be bodder'n yo' ma fer ter borry a cup
full er sugar eve'y now en den; en it look like ter me dat I knows a 
nigger dat wouldn't be squattin' 'roun' yer makin' dese yer 
fish-baskits."

"How did the Bear get into more  trouble, Uncle Remus?" asked
the little boy.

"N atchul, honey. Brer B'ar, he tuck a notion dat  ole  Brer
Bull-frog wuz de man w'at fool 'im, en he say dat he'd come up wid
'im ef 'twuz a year atterwuds. But 'twan't no year, an 'twan't no
mont', en mo'n dat, hit wan't skasely a week, w'en bimeby one day
Brer B'ar wuz gwine home fum de takin' un a bee-tree, en lo en
beholes, who should he see but ole Brer Bull-frog settin' out on de
aidge er de mud-muddle fas' 'sleep! Brer B'ar drap his axe, he did,
en crope up, en retch out wid his paw, en scoop ole Brer Bull-frog
in des dis away." Here the old man used his hand ladle-fashion, by
way of illustration. "He scoop 'im in, en dar he wuz. W'en Brer B'ar
got his dampers on 'im good, he sot down en talk at 'im.

"'Howdy, Brer Bull-frog, howdy! En how yo fambly? I hope deyer
well, Brer Bull-frog, kaze dis day you got some bizness wid me
w'at'll las' you a mighty long time.'

"Brer Bull-frog, he dunner w'at ter say. He dunner wat's up, en he
don't say nuthin'. Ole Brer B'ar he keep runnin' on:

"'Youer de man w'at tuck en fool me 'bout Brer Rabbit t'er day.
You had yo' fun, Brer Bull-frog, en now I'll git mine.'

"Den Brer Bull-frog, he gin ter git skeerd, he did, en he up'n say:

"'W'at I bin doin', Brer B'ar? How I bin foolin' you?'

"Den Brer B'ar laff, en make like he dunno, but he keep on talkin'.

"'Oh, no, Brer Bull-frog! You ain't de man w'at stick yo' head up
out'n de water en tell me Brer Rabbit done gone on by. Oh, no! you
ain't de man. I bonn' you ain't. 'Bout dat time, you wuz at home
with yo' fambly, whar you allers is. I dunner whar you wuz, but I
knows whar you is, Brer Bull-frog, en hit's you en me fer it. Atter
de sun goes down dis day you don't fool no mo' folks gwine 'long
dis road.'

"Co'se, Brer Bull-frog dunner w'at Brer B'ar drivin' at, but he know
sump'n hatter be done, en dat mighty soon, kaze Brer B'ar 'gun to
snap his jaws tergedder en foam at de mouf, en Brer Bull-frog
holler out:

"'Oh, pray, Brer B'ar! Lemme off dis time, en I won't never do so
no mo'. Oh, pray, Brer B'ar! do lemme off dis time, en I'll show
you de fattes' bee-tree in de woods.'

"Ole Brer B'ar, he chomp his toofies en foam at de mouf. Brer
Bull-frog he des up'n squall:

"'Oh, pray, Brer B'ar! I won't never do so no mo'! Oh, pray, Brer
B'ar! Lenune off dis time!'

"But ole Brer B'ar say he gwineter make way wid 'im, en den he sot
en study, ole Brer B'ar did, how he gwineter squench Brer
Bull-frog. He know he can't drown 'im, en he ain't got no fier fer
ter bu'n 'im, en he git mighty pestered. Bimeby ole Brer Bull-frog,
he sorter stop his cryin' en his boo-hooin', en he up'n say:

"'Ef you gwineter kill me, Brer B'ar, kyar me ter dat big flat rock
out dar on de aidge er de mill-pon', whar I kin see my fambly, en
atter I see urn, den you kin take you axe en sqush me.'

"Dis look so fa'r and squar' dat Brer B'ar he 'gree, en he take ole
Brer Bull-frog by wunner his behime legs, en sling his axe on his
shouder, en off he put fer de big flat rock. When he git dar he lay
Brer Bullfrog down on de rock, en Brer Bull-frog make like he
lookin' 'roun' fer his folks. Den Brer B'ar, he draw long breff en
pick up his axe. Den he spit in his han's en draw back en come
down on de rock-pow!"

"'Did he kill the Frog, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy, as the
old man paused to scoop up a thimbleful of glowing embers in his
pipe.

'Deed, en dat hc didn't, honey. 'Twix' de time w'en Brer B'ar raise
up wid his axe en w'en he come down wid it, ole Brer Bull-frog he
lipt up en dove down in de mill-pon', kerblink-kerblunk! En w'en
he riz way out in de pon' he riz a singin', en dish yer's de song w'at
he sing:

"'Ingle-go-jang, my joy, my joy-
Ingle-go-jang, my joy!
I'm right at home, my joy, my joy-
Ingle-go-jang, my joy!'"

"That's a mighty funny song," said the little boy.

'Funny now, I speck," said the old man, "but 'twern't funny in dem
days, en 'twouldn't be funny now ef folks know'd much 'bout de
Bull-frog langwidge ez dey useter. Dat's w'at."

XXV HOW MR. RABBIT LOST HIS FINE BUSHY TML

"ONE time," said Uncle Remus, sighing heavily and settling
himself back in his seat with an afr of melancholy resiguation-"one
time Brer Rabbit wnz gwine 'long down de road shakin' his big
bushy tail, en feelin' des ez scrumpshus ez a bee-martin wid a fresh
bug." Here the old man paused and glanced at the little boy, but it
was evident that the youngster had become so accustomed to the
marvelous developments of Uncle Remus's stories, that the
extraordinary statement made no nnusual impression upon him.
Therefore the old man began again, and this time in a louder and
more insinuating tone:

"One time ole man Rabbit, he wuz gwine 'long down de road
shakin' his long, bushy tail, en feelin' mighty biggity."

This was effective.

"Great goodiiess, Uncle Remus!" exclaimed the little boy in
open-eyed wonder, "everybody knows that rabbits haven't got long,
bushy tails."

The old man shifted his position in his chafr and allowed his
venerable head to drop forward until his whole appearance was
suggestive of the deepest dejection; and this was intensified by a
groan that seemed to be the result of great mental agony. Finally he
spoke, but not as addressing himself to the little boy.

"I notices dat dem fokes w'at makes a great 'miration 'bout w'at
dey knows is des de fokes w'ich you can't put no 'pennunce in w'en
de 'cashun come up. Yer one un um now, en he done come en
excuse me er 'lowin dat rabbits is got long, bushy tails,  w'ich 
goodness knows ef I'd a dremp' it, I'd a whfrl in en on dremp it."

"Well, but Uncle Remus, you said rabbits had long, bushy tails,"
replied the little boy. "Now you know you did."

"Ef I ain't fergit it off'n my mine, I say dat ole Brer Rabbit wuz
gwine down de big road shakin' his long, bushy tail. Dat w'at I say,
en dat I stan's by."

The little boy looked puzzled, but he didn't say anything. After a
while the old man continued:

"Now, den, ef dat's 'greed ter, rm gwine on, en ef tain't 'greed ter,
den I'm gwineter pick up my cane en look atter my own. intrust. I
got wuk lyin''roun' yer dat's des natally gittin' moldy."

The little boy still remained quiet, and Uncle Remus proceeded:

"One day Brer Rabbit wuz gwine down de road shakin' his long,
bushy tail, w'en who should he strike up wid but ole Brer Fox
gwine amblin' long wid a big string er fish! W'en dey pass de time
er day wid wunner nudder, Brer Rabbit, he open up de confab, he
did, en he ax Brer Fox whar he git dat nice string er fish, en Brer
Fox, he up'n 'spon' dat he katch urn, en Brer Rabbit, he say
whar'bouts, en Brer Fox, he say down at de babtizin' creek, en Brer
Rabbit he ax how, kaze in dem days dey wuz monstus fon' er
minners, en Brer Fox, he sot down on a log, he did, en he up'n tell
Brer Rabbit dat all he gotter do fer ter git er big mess er minners is
ter go ter de creek atter sun down, en drap his tail in de water en
set dar twel day-light, en den draw up a whole armful er fishes, en
dem w'at he don't want, he kin fling back. Right dar's whar Brer
Rabbit drap his watermillion, kaze he tuck'n sot out dat night en
went a fishin'. De wedder wuz sorter cole, en Brer Rabbit, he got
'im a bottle er dram en put out fer de creek, en w'en he git dar he
pick out a good place, en he sorter squot down, he did, en let his
tail hang in de water. He sot dar, en he sot dar, en he drunk his
dram, en he think he gwineter freeze, but bimeby day come, en dar
he wuz. He make a pull, en he feel like he comin' in two, en he
fetch nudder jerk, en lo en beholes, whar wuz his tail?"

There was a long pause.

"Did it come off, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy, presently.

"She did dat!" replied the old man with unction. "She did dat, and
dat w'at make all deze yer bob-tail rabbits w'at you see hoppin' en
skaddlin' thoo de woods."

"Are they all that way just because the old Rabbit lost his tail in
the creek?" asked the little boy.

"Dat's it, honey," replied the old man. "Dat's w'at dey tells me.
Look like dey er bleedzd ter take atter der pa."

XXVI MR. TERRAPIN SHOWS HIS STRENGTH

"BRER TARRYPIN wuz de out'nes' man," said Uncle Remus,
rubbing his hands together contemplatively, and chuckling to
himself in a very signfficant manner; 'he wuz de out'nes' man er de
whole gang. He wuz dat."

The little boy sat perfectly quiet, betraying no impatience when
Uncle Remus paused to hunt, first in one pocket and then in
another, for enough crumbs of tobacco to replenish his pipe.
Presently the old man proceeded:

"One night Miss Meadows en de gals dey gun a candy-pullin', en
so many er de nabers come in 'sponse ter de invite dat dey hatter
put de lasses in de wash pot en b'il' de fier in de yard. Brer B'ar, he
hope*1 Miss Meadows bring de wood, Brer Fox, he men' de fier,
Brer Wolf, he kep' de dogs off, Brer Rabbit, he grease de bottom er
de plates fer ter keep de candy fum stickin', en Brer Tarrypin, he
Hum up in a cheer, en say he'd watch en see dat de lasses didn't
bile over. Dey wnz all dere, en dey wem't cuttin' up no didos,
nudder, kaze Miss Meadows, she done put her foot down, she did,
en say dat w'en dey come ter her place dey hatter hang up a flag er
truce at de front gate en 'bide by it.

"Well, den, w'iles dey wuz all a settin' dar en de lasses wuz a bilin'
en a blubberin', dey got ter runnin' on talkin' mighty biggity. Brer
Rabbit, he say he de swiffes'; but Brer Tarrypin, he rock long in de
cheer en watch de lasses. Brer Fox, he say he de sharpes', but Brer
Tarrypin he rock long. Brer Wolf, he say he de mos' Suvvigus, but
Brer Tarrypin, he roek en he rock long. Brer B'ar, he say he de
mos' stronges', but Brer Tarrypin he rock, en he keep on rockin'.
Bimeby he sorter shet one eye, en say, sezee:

"'Hit look like 'periently dat de ole hardshell ain't nowhars longside
er dis crowd, yit yer I is, en I'm de same man w'at show Brer
Rabbit dat he ain't de swiffes'; en I'm de same man w'at kin show
Brer B'ar dat he ain't de stronges',' sezee.

"Den dey all laff en holler, kaze it look like Brer B'ar mo' stronger
dan a steer. Bimeby, Miss Meadows, she up'n ax, she did, how he
gwine do it.

"'Gimme a good strong rope,' sez Brer Tarrypin, sezee, 'en lemme
git in er puddle er water, en den let Brer B'ar see ef he kin pull me
out,' sezee.

"Den dey all laff g'in, en Brer B'ar, he ups en sez, sezee: 'We ain't
got no rope,' sezee.

No,' sez Brer Tarrypin, sezee, 'en needer is you got de strenk,'
sezee, en den Brer Tarrypin, he rock en rock long, en watch de
lasses a bum' en a blubberin'.

"Atter w'ile Miss Meadows, she up en say, she did, dat she'd take'n
loan de young men her bed-cord, en w'iles de candy wnz a coolin'
in de plates, dey could all go ter de branch en see Brer Tarrypin
kyar out his projick. Brer Tarrypin," continued Uncle Remus, in a
tone at once confidential and argumentative, "wem't much bigger'n
de pa'm er my han', en it look mighty funny fer ter year 'im braggin'
'bout how he kin out-pull Brer B'ar. But dey got de bed-cord atter
w'ile, en den dey all put out ter de branch. W"en Brer Tarrypin fine
de place he wanter, he tuck one een er de bed-cord, en gun de
yather een' to Brer B'ar.

"'Now den, ladies en gents,' sez Brer Tarrypin, sezee, 'you all go
wid Brer B'ar up dar in de woods en I'll stay yer, en w'en you year
me holler, den's de time fer Brer B'ar fer ter see ef he kin haul in
de slack er de rope. You all take keer er dat ar een',' sezee, 'en Ill
take keer er dish yer een',' sezee.

"Den dey all put out en lef' Brer Tarrypin at de branch, en w'en dey
got good en gone, he dove down inter de water, he did, en tie de
bed-cord hard en fas' ter wunner deze yer big clay-roots, en den he
riz up en gin a whoop.

"Brer B'ar he wrop de bed-cord roun' his han,' en wink at de gals,
en wid dat he gin a big juk, but Brer Tanypin ain't budge. Den he
take bof han's en gin a big pull, but, all de same, Brer Tarrypin
ain't budge. Den he tu'n 'roun', he did, en put de rope cross his
shoulders en try ter walk off wid Brer Tarrypin, but Brer Tarrypin
look like he don't feel like walkin'. Den Brer Wolf he put in en
hope Brer B'ar pull, but des like he didn't, en den dey all hope 'im,
en, bless grashus! w'iles dey wnz all a pullin', Brer Tarrypin, he
holler, en ax urn w'y dey don't take up de slack.

Den w'en Brer Tarrypin feel urn quit pullin', he dove down, he did,
en ontie de rope, en by de time dey got ter de branch, Brer
Tarrypin, he wnz settin' in de aidge er de water des ez natchul ez
de nex' un, en he up'n say, sezee:

Dat las' pull er yone wuz a mighty stiff un, en a leetle mo'n you'd er
had me,' sezee. 'Youer monstus stout, Brer B'ar,' sezee, 'en you
pulls like a yoke er steers, but I sorter had de purchis on you,'
sezee.

"Den Brer B'ar, bein's his mouf 'gun ter water atter de sweetnin,' he
up'n say he speck de candy's ripe, en off dey put atter it!"

"It's a wonder," said the little boy, after a while, "that the rope
didh't break."

"Break who?" exclaimed Uncle Remus, with a touch of
indignation in his tone-"break who? In dem days, Miss Meadows's
bed-cord would a hilt a mule."

This put an end to whatever doubts the child might have
entertained.

*1  Help; helped.

 XXVII  WHY MR. POSSUM HAS NO HAIR ON HIS TAIL

 "HIT look like ter me," said Uncle Remus, frowning, as the little
boy came hopping and skipping into the old man's cabin, "dat I see
a young un 'bout yo' size playin' en makin' free wid dem ar chilluns
er ole Miss Favers's yistiddy, en w'en I seed dat, I drap my axe, en I
come in yer en sot flat down right whar youer settin' now, en I say
ter myse'f dat it's 'bout time fer ole Remus fer ter hang up en quit.
Dat's des zackly w'at I say."

"Well, Uncle Remus, they called me," said the little boy, in a
penitent tone. 'They come and called me, and said they had a pistol
and some powder over there."

"Dar now!" exclaimed the old man, indignantly. "Dar now! w'at I
bin sayin'? Hit's des a born bless-in' dat you wa'n't brung home on a
litter wid bofe eyeballs hangin' out en one year clean gone; dat's
w'at 'tis. Hit's des a born blessin'. Hit hope me up mightly de udder
day w'en I hear Miss Sally layin' down de law 'bout you en dem
Favers chillun, yit, lo en beholes, de fus news I knows yer you is
han'-in-glove wid urn. Hit's nuff fer ter fetch ole Miss right up out'n
dat berryin'-groun' fum down dar in Putmon County, en w'at yo'
gram'ma wouldn't er stood me en yo' ma ain't gwineter stan'
nudder, en de nex time I hear 'bout sech a come off ez dis, right
den en dar I'm bonn' ter lay de case 'fo' Miss Sally. Dem Favers's
wa'n't no 'count 'fo' de war, en dey wa'n't no 'count endurin' er de
war, en dey ain't no 'count atterwards, en w'iles my head's hot you
ain't gwineter go mixin' up yo'se'f wid de riff-raff er creashun."

The little boy made no further attempt to justify his conduct. He
was a very wise little boy, and he knew that, in Uncle Remus's
eyes, he had been guilty of a flagrant violation of the family code.
Therefore, instead of attempting to justify himself, he pleaded
guilty, and promised that he would never do so any more. After
this there was a long period of silence, broken only by the vigorous
style in which Uncle Remus puffed away at his pipe. This was the
in-variable result. Whenever the old man had occasion to
reprimand the little boy-and the occasions were frequent-he would
relapse into a diguffied but stubborn silence. Presently the
youngster drew forth from his pocket a long piece of candle. The
sharp eyes of the old man saw it at once.

"Don't you come a tellin' me dat Miss Sally gun you dat," he
exclaimed, "kaze she didn't. En I lay you hatter be monstus sly 'fo'
you gotter chance fer ter snatch up dat piece er canule."

"Well, Uncle Remus," the little boy explained, "it was lying there
all by itself, and I just thought I'd fetch it out to you.

"Dat's so, honey," said Uncle Remus, greatly mollified; "dat's so,
kaze by now some er dem yuther niggers 'ud er done had her lit up.
Dey er mighty biggity, dem house niggers is, but I notices dat dey
don't let nuthin' pass. Dey goes 'long wid der han's en der mouf
open, en w'at one don't ketch de tother one do."

There was another pause, and finally the little boy said:

"Uncle Remus, you know you promised to-day to tell me why the
'Possum has no hair on his tail."

"Law, honey! ain't you done gone en fergot dat off'n yo' mine yit?
Hit look like ter me," continued the old man, leisureW refilling his
pipe, "dat she sorter run like dis: One time ole Brer Possum, he git
so hungry, he did, dat he bleedzd fer ter have a mess er 'simmons.
He monstus lazy man, old Brer Possum wuz, but bimeby his
stummick 'gun ter growl en holler at 'im so dat he des hatter rack
'roun' en hunt up sump'n; en w'iles he wnz rackin' 'roun', who sh'd 
he run up wid but Brer Rabbit, en dey wuz hail-fellers, kaze Brer
Possum, he ain't bin bodder'n Brer Rabbit like dem yuther creeturs.
Dey sot down by de side er de big road, en dar dey jabber en
confab 'mong wunner nudder, twel bimeby old Brer Possum, he
take 'n tell Brer Rabbit dat he mos' pe'sh out, en Brer Rabbit, he lip
up in de a'r, he did, en smack his han's tergedder, en say dat he
know right whar Brer Possum kin git a bait er 'simmons. Den Brer
Possum, he say whar, en Brer Rabbit, he say w'ich 'twuz over at
Brer B'ar's 'simmon orchard."

"Did the Bear have a 'simmon orchard, Uncle Remus?" the little
boy asked.

"Co'se, honey, kaze in dem days Brer B'ar wuz a bee-hunter. He
make his livin' findin' bee trees, en de way he fine urn he plant 'im
some 'simmon-trees, w'ich de bees dey'd come ter suck de
'simmons en den ole Brer B'ar he'd watch urn whar dey'd go, en
den he'd be mighty ap' fer ter come up wid urn. No matter 'bout
dat, de 'simmon patch 'uz dar des like I tell you, en ole Brer
Possum mouf 'gun ter water soon's he year talk un urn, en mos' 'fo'
Brer Rabbit done tellin' 'im de news, Brer Possum, he put out, he
did, en 'twa'n't long 'fo' he wuz perch up in de highes' tree in Brer
B'ar 'simmon patch. But Brer Rabbit, he done 'termin' fer ter see
some fun, en w'iles all dis 'uz gwine on, he run 'roun' ter Brer B'ar
house, en holler en tell 'im w'ich dey wnz somebody 'stroyin' un his
'simmons, en Brer B'ar, he hustle off fer ter ketch 'im.

"Eve'y now en den Brer Possum think he year Brer B'ar comin',
but he keep on sayin', sezee:

"'I'll des git one 'simmon mo' en den Ill go; one 'simmon mo' en
den I'll go.'

"Las' he year Brer B'ar comm' sho nuff, but 'twuz  de same ole
chune-'One 'simmon mo' en den I'll go' -en des 'bout dat time Brer
B'ar busted inter de patch, en gin de tree a shake, en Brer Possum,
he drapt out longer de yuther ripe 'simmons, but time he totch de
groun' he got his foots tergedder, en he lit out fer de fence same ez
a race-hoss, en 'cross dat patch him en Brer B'ar had it, en Brer B'ar
gain' eve'y jump, twel time Brer Possum make de fence Brer B'ar
grab 'im by de tail, en Brer Possum, he went out 'tween de rails en
gin a powerful juk en pull his tail out 'twix Brer B'ar tushes; en, lo
en beholes, Brer B'ar hole so tight en Brer Possum pull so hard dat
all de ha'r come off in Brer B'ar's mouf, w'ich, ef Brer Rabbit
hadn't er happen up wid a go'd er water, Brer B'ar 'der got strankle.

'Turn dat day ter dis," said Uncle Remus, knocking the ashes
carefully out of his pipe, "Brer Possum ain't had no ha'r on his tail,
en needer do his chilluns."

 XXVIII THE END OF MR. BEAR

The next time the little boy sought Uncle Remus out, he found the
old man unusually cheerful and good-humoured. His rheumatism
had ceased to trouble him, and he was even disposed to be
boisterous. He was singing when the little boy got near the cabin,
and the child paused on the outside to listen to the vigorous but
mellow voice of the old man, as it rose and fell with the burden of
the curiously plaintive song-a senseless affair so far as the words
were concerned, but sung to a melody almost thrilling in its
sweetness:

"Han' me down my walkin'-cane
 (Hey my Lily! go down de road!), 
Yo' true lover gone down de lane
 (Hey my Lily! go down de road!)."

The quick ear of Uncle Remus, however, had detected the
presence of the little boy, and he allowed his song to run into a
recitation of nonsense, of which the following, if it be rapidly
spoken, will give a faint idea:

"Ole M'er Jackson, fines' confraction, fell down sta'rs fer to git
satisfaction; big Bill Fray, he rule de day, eve'ything he call fer
come one, two by three. Gwine 'long one day, met Johnny Huby,
ax him grine nine yards er steel fer me, tole me w'ich he couldn't:
den I hist 'im over Hiekerson Dickerson's barn-doors; knock 'im
ninety-nine miles under water, w'en he rise, he rise in Fike straddle
un a hanspike, en I lef' 'im dar smokin' er de horupipe, Juba reda
seda breda. Aunt Kate at de gate; I want to eat, she fry de meat en
gimme skin, w'ich I fling it back agin. Juba!"

All this, rattled off at a rapid rate and with apparent seriousness,
was calculated to puzzle the little boy, and he slipped into his
accustomed seat with an expression of awed bewilderment upon
his face.

"Hit's all des dat away, honey," continued the old man, with the air
of one who had just given an ini portant piece of information. "En
w'en you bin cas'n shadders long ez de ole nigger, den you'll fine
out who's w'ich, en w'ich's who."

The little boy made no response. He was in thorough sympathy
with all the whims and humors of the old man, and his capacity for
enjoying them was large enough to include even those he could not
understand. Uncle Remus was finishing an axe-handle, and upon
these occasions it was his custom to allow the child to hold one
end while he applied sand-paper to the other. These relations were
pretty soon established, to the mutual satisfaction of the parties
most interested, and the old man continued his remarks, but this
time not at random:

"W'en I see deze yer swell-head folks like dat oman w'at come en
tell yo' ma 'bout you churkiin' at her chilluns, w'ich yo ma make
Mars John strop you, hit make my mine run back to ole Brer B'ar.
Ole Brer B'ar, he got de swell-headedness hisse'f, en ef der wuz
enny swinkin', hit swunk too late fer ter he'p ole Brer B'ar. Leas'
ways dat's w'at dey tells me, en I ain't never yearn it 'sputed."

"Was the Bear's head sure enough swelled, Uncle Remus?"

"Now you talkin', honey!" exclaimed the old man.

"Goodness! what made it swell?"

This was Uncle Remus's cue. Applying the sand-paper to the
axe-helve with gentle vigor, he began.

"One time when Brer Rabbit wnz gwine lopin' home film a frolic
w'at dey bin havin' up at Miss Meadows's, who should he happin
up wid but ole Brer B'ar. Go'se, atter w'at done pass 'twix urn dey
wa'n't no good feelin's 'tween Brer Rabbit en ole Brer B'ar, but Brer
Rabbit, he wanter save his manners, en so he holler out:

"Heyo, Brer B'ar! how you come on? I ain't seed you in a coon's
age. How all down at yo' house? How Miss Brune en Miss
Brindle?"

"Who was that, Uncle Remus?" the little boy interrupted.

"Miss Brune en Miss Brindle? Miss Brune wuz Brer B'ar's ole
'oman, en Miss Brindle wnz his gal. Dat w'at dey call urn in dem
days. So den Brer Rabbit, he ax him howdy, he did, en Brer B'ar,
he 'spon' dat he wuz mighty po'y, en dey amble 'long, dey did,
sorter familious like, but Brer Rabbit, he keep one eye on Brer
B'ar, en Brer B'ar, he study how he gwine nab Brer Rabbit. Las'
Brer Rabbit, he up'n say, sezee:

"'Brer B'ar, I speck I got some bizness cut out fer you,' sezee.

"'What dat, Brer Rabbit?' sez Brer B'ar, sezee.

"'W'iles I wuz cleanin' up my new-groun' day 'fo' yistiddy,' sez Brer
Rabbit, sezee, 'I come 'cross wun-ner deze yer ole time bee-trees.
Hit start holler at de bottom, en stay holler plum der de top, en de
honey's des natally oozin' out, en ef you'll drap yo' 'gagements en
go longer me,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'youll git a bait datil las' you
en yo' fambly twel de middle er nex' mont',' sezee.

 "Brer B'ar say he much oblije en he bleeve he'll go long, en wid
dat dey put out fer Brer Rabbit's newgroun', w'ich twa'n't so mighty
fur. Leas'ways, dey got dar atter w'ile. Ole Brer B'ar, he low dat he
kin smell de honey. Brer Rabbit, he low dat he kin see de
honey-koam. Brer B'ar, he low dat he can hear de bees a zoonin'.
Dey stan' 'roun' en talk biggity, dey did,  twel bimeby Brer Rabbit, 
he up'n say, sezee:

"'You do de clim-'in', Brer B'ar, en I'll do de rushin' 'roun'; you
clime up ter de hole, en fll take dis yer pine pole en shove de
honey up whar you kin git 'er,' sezee.

"Ole Brer B'ar, he spit on his han's en skint up de tree, en jam his
head in de hole, en sho nuff, Brer Rabbit, he grab de pine pole, en
de way he stfr up dem bees wuz sinful-dat's w'at it wuz. Hit wuz
sinful. En de bees dey swawm'd on Brer B'ar's head, twel 'fo' he
could take it out'n de hole' hit wuz done swell up bigger dan dat
dinner-pot, en dar he swung, en ole Brer Rabbit, he dance 'roun' en
sing:

"Tree stan' high, but honey mighty sweet-
Watch dem bees wid stingers on der feet.'

"But dar ole Brer B'ar hung, en ef his head ain't swunk, I speck he
hangin' dar yit-dat w'at I speck."

XXIX  MR. FOX GETS INTO SERIOUS BUSINESS

"Hrr turn out one time," said Uncle Remus, grinding some crumbs
of tobacco between the palms of his hands, preparatory to enjoying
his usual smoke after supper-"hit turn out one time dat Brer Rabbit
make so free wid de man's collard-patch dat de man he tuck'n sot a
trap fer ole Brer Rabbit."

"Which man was that, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy.

"Des a man, honey. Dat's all. Dat's all I knows -des wunner dese
yer mans w'at you see trollopin 'roun' eve'y day. Nobody ain't never
year w'at his name is, en ef dey did dey kep' de news mighty close
fum me. Ef dish yer man is bleedzd fer ter have a name, den I'm
done, kaze you'll hatter go fudder dan me. Ef you bleedzd ter
know mo' dan w'at I duz, den you'll hatter hunt up some er deze
yer niggers w'at's sprung up sence I commence fer ter shed my
ha'r."

"Well, I just thought, Uncle Remus," said the little boy, in a tone
remarkable for self-depreciation, "that the man had a name."

"Tooby sho," replied the old man, with unction, puffing away at
his pipe. "Co'se. Dat w'at make I say w'at I duz. Dish yer man mout
a had a name, en den ag'in he moutn't. He mont er bin name
Slip-shot Sam, en he mouter bin name ole One-eye Riley, w'ich ef
'twuz hit ain't bin handed roun' ter me. But dish yer man, he in de
tale, en w'at we gwine do wid 'im? Dats de p'int, kase w'en I git ter
huntin' 'roun' 'mong my 'membunce atter dish yer Mister
W'atyoumaycollum's name, she ain't dar. Now den, less des call 'im
Mr. Man en let 'im go at dat."

The silence of the little boy gave consent.

"One time," said Uncle Remus, carefully taking up the thread of
the story where it had been dropped, "hit turn out dat Brer Rabbit
bin makin' so free wid Mr. Man's greens en truck dat Mr. Man, he
tuck'n sot a trap for Brer Rabbit, en Brer Rabbit he so greedy dat
he tuck'n walk right spang in it, 'fo' he know hisse'f. Well, 'twa'n't
long 'fo' yer come Mr. Man, broozin' 'roun', en he ain't no sooner
see ole Brer Rabbit dan he smack his han's tergedder en holler out:

"'Youer nice feller, you is! Yer you bin gobblin' up my green truck,
en now you tryin' ter tote off my trap. Youer mighty nice chap-dat's
w'at you is! But now dat I got you, I'll des 'bout settle wid you fer
de ole en de new.'

"En wid dat, Mr. Man, he go off, he did, down in de bushes atter
han'ful er switches. Ole Brer Rabbit, he ain't sayin' nuthin', but he
feelin' mighty lonesome, en he sot dar lookin' like eve'y minnit wnz
gwineter be de nex'. En w'iles Mr. Man wuz off prepa'r'n his
bresh-broom, who should come p'radin' long but Brer Fox. Brer
Fox make a great 'miration, he did, 'bout de fix w'at he fine Brer
Rabbit in, but Brer Rabbit he make like he fit ter kill hisse'f laffin',
en he up'n tell Brer Fox, he did, dat Miss Meadows's fokes want
'im ter go down ter der house in 'tennunce on a weddin', en he low
w'ich he couldn't, en dey low how he could, en den bimeby dey
take'n tie 'im dar w'iles dey go atter de preacher, so he be dar' w'en
dey come back. En mo'n dat, Brer Rabbit up'n tell Brer Fox dat his
chillun's mighty low wid de fever, en he bleedzd ter go atter some
pills fer'm, en he ax Brer Fox fer ter take his place en go down ter
Miss Meadows's en have nice time wid de gals. Brer Fox, he in fer
dem kinder pranks, en 'twa'n't no time 'fo' Brer Rabbit had ole Brer
Fox harness up dar in his place, en den he make like he got ter
make 'as'e en git de pills fer dem sick chilluns. Brer Rabbit wa'n't
mo'n out er sight 'fo' yer come Mr. Man wid a han'ful er hick'ries,
but w'en he see Brer Fox tied up dar, he look like he 'stonished.

"'Heyo!' sez Mr. Man, sezee, 'you done change color, en you done
got bigger, en yo' tail done grow out. W'at kin'er w'atzyname is
you, ennyhow?' sezee.

"Brer Fox, he stay still, en Mr. Man, he talk on:

"'Hit's mighty big luck,' sezee, 'ef w'en I ketch de chap w'at nibble
my greens, likewise I ketch de feller w'at gnyaw my goose,' sezee,
en wid dat he let inter Brex Fox wid de hick'ries, en de way he play
rap-jacket wuz a caution ter de naberhood. Brer Fox, he juk en he
jump, en he squeal en he squall, but Mr. Man, he shower down on
'im, he did, like fightin' a red was'nes'."

The little boy laughed, and Uncle Remus supplemented this
indorsement of his descriptive powers with a most infectious
chuckle.

"'Bimeby," continued the old man, "de switches, dey got frazzle
out, en Mr. Man, he put out atter mo', en w'en he done got fa'rly
outer yearin', Brer Rabbit, he show'd up, he did, kaze he des bin
hidin' out in de bushes lis'nin' at de racket, en he low hit mighty
funny dat Miss Meadows ain't come 'long, kaze he done bin down
ter de doctor house, en dat's fudder dan de preacher, yit. Brer
Rabbit make like he hurr'in' on home, but Brer Fox, he open up, he
did, en he say:

"'I thank you fer ter tu'n me loose, Brer Rabbit, en Ill be 'blije,'
sezee, Icaze you done tie me up so tight dat it make my head swim,
en I don't speck I'd las' fer ter git ter Miss Meadows's,' sezee.

"Brer Rabbit, he sot down sorter keerless like, en begin fer ter
scratch one year like a man studyin' 'bout sump'n.

"'Dat's so, Brer Fox,' sezee, 'you duz look sorter stove up. Look like
sump'n bin onkoamin' yo' ha'rs,' sezee.

"Brer Fox ain't sayin' nothin', but Brer Rabbit, he keep on talkin':

'Dey ain't no bad feelin's 'twix' us, is dey, Brer Fox? Kaze ef dey is,
I ain't got no time fer ter be tarryin' 'roun' yer.'

"Brer Fox say w'ich he don't have no onfrennelness, en wid dat
Brer Rabbit cut Brer Fox loose des in time fer ter hear Mr. Man
w'isserlin up his dogs, en one went one way en de udder went
nudder."

XXX HOW MR. RABBIT SUCCEEDED IN RAISING A DUST

"IN dem times," said Uncle Remus, gazing admiringly at himself
in a fragment of looking-glass, "Brer Rabbit, en Brer Fox, en Brer
Coon, en dem yuther creeturs go co'tin' en sparklin' 'roun' de
naberhood mo' samer dan folks. 'Twan't no 'Lemme a hoss,' ncr
'Fetch me my buggy,' but dey des up'n lit out en tote deyse'f. Dar's
ole Brer Fox, he des wheel 'roun' en fetch his flank one swipe wid
'is tongue en he'd be koam up; en Brer Rabbit, he des spit on his
han' en twis' it 'roun' 'mongst de roots er his years en his ha'r'd be
roach. Dey wuz dat flirtashus," continued the old man, closing one
eye at his image in the glass, "dat Miss Meadows en de gals don't
se no peace fum one week een' ter de udder. Chuseday wuz same
as Sunday, en Friday wuz same as Chuseday, en hit come down ter
dat pass dat w'en Miss Meadows 'ud have chicken-fixins fer
dinner, in 'ud drap Brer Fox en Brer Possum, en w'en she'd have
fried greens in 'ud pop ole Brer Rabbit, twel las' Miss Meadows,
she tuck'n tell de gals dat she be dad-blame ef she gwineter keep
no tavuum. So dey fix it up 'mong deyse'f, Miss Meadows en de
gals did, dat de nex' time de gents call dey'd gin um a game. De
gents, dey wuz a co'tin, but Miss Meadows, she don't wanter marry
none un um, en needer duz de gals, en likewise dey don't wanter
have um pester'n 'roan.' Las', one Chuscday, Miss Meadows, she
tole um dat ef dey come down ter her house de nex' Sat'day
evenin', dc whole caboodle an um 'ud go down de road a piece,
whar der wuz a big flint rock, en de man w'at could take a
sludge-hammer en knock de dus' ont'n dat rock, he wnz de man
w'at 'ud git de pick er de gals. Dey all say dey gwinc do it, but ole
Brer Rabbit, he crope off whar der wuz a cool place under some
jimson weeds, en dar he sot wkkkin his mind how he gwineter git
dus' out'n dat rock. Bimeby, w'ile he wuz a settin' dar, up he jump
en crack his heels tergedder en sing out:

"'Make a bow ter de Buzzard en den ter de Crow, 
Takes a limber-toe gemmun fer ter jump Jim Crow,'

en wid dat he put out for Brer Coon house en borrer his slippers.
W'cn Sat'day evenin' come, dey wuz all dere. Miss Meadows en de
gals, dey wnz dere; en Brer Coon, en Brer Fox, en Brer Possum, en
Brer Tarrypin, dey wtiz dere."

"Where was the Rabbit?" the litde boy asked. 

"Yuk'n put yo' 'pennunce in ole Brer Rabbit," the old man replied,
with a chuckle. "He wuz dere, but he shuffle up kinder late, kaze
w'en Miss Meadows en de ballunce an um done gone down ter de
place, Brer Rabbit, he crope 'roan' ter de ash-hopper, en fill Brer
Coon slippers full er ashes, en den he tuck'n put um on en march
off. He got dar atter 'w'ile, en soon's Miss Meadows en de gals
seed 'im, dey up'n giggle, en make a great 'miration kaze Brer
Rabbit got on slippers. Brer Fox, he so smart, he holler out, he did,
en say he lay Brer Rabbit got de groun'-eatch, but Brer Rabbit, he
sorter shet one eye, he did, en say, sezee:

"'I bin so useter ridin' hoss-back, ez deze ladies knows, dat I'm
gittin' sorter tender-footed;' en dey don't hear much mo' fum Brer
Fox dat day, kaze he 'member how Brer Rabbit done bin en rid
him; en hit 'uz des 'bout much ez Miss Meadows en de gals could
do fer ter keep der snickers fum gittin' up a 'sturbance 'mong de
congergashun. But, never mine dat, old Brer Rabbit, he wnz dar,
en he so brash dat leetle mo' en he'd er grab up de sludge-hammer
en er open up de racket 'fo' ennybody gun de word; but Brer Fox,
he shove Brer Rabbit out'n de way en pick up de sludge hisse'f.
Now den," continued the old man, with pretty much the air of one
who had been the master of similar ceremonies, "de progance wuz
dish yer: Eve'y gent wer ter have th'ee licks at de rock, en de gent
w'at fetch de dus' he were de one w'at gwineter take de pick er de
gals. Ole Brer Fox, he grab de sludge-hammer, he did, en he come
down on de rock-bum!

No dus' ain't come. Den he draw back en down he come ag'in-
blam! No dus' ain't come. Den he spit in his han's, en give 'er
a big swing en down she come-kerbiap! En yit no dus' ain't flew'd.
Den Brer Possum he make triul, en Brer Coon, en all de ballunce
un urn 'cep' Brer Tarrypin, en he 'low dat he got a crick in his
neck. Den Brer Rabbit, he grab holt er de sludge, en he lipt up in
de a'r en come down on de rock all at de same time-pow!-en de
ashes, dey flew'd up so, dey did, dat Brer Fox, be .tuck'n had a
sneezm' spell, en Miss Meadows en de gals dey up'n koff. Th'ee
times Brer Rabbit jump up en crack his heels tergedder en come
down wid de sludge-hammer-ker-blam!-en eve'y time he jump up,
he holler out:

"'Stan' fudder, ladies! Yer come de dus'!' en sho nuff, de dus'
come.

"Leas'ways," continued Uncle Remus, "Brer Rabbit got one er de
gals, en dey had a weddin' en a big infa'r."

"Which of the girls did the Rabbit marry?" asked the little boy,
dubiously.

"I did year tell an 'er name," replied the old man, with a great
affectation of interest, 'but look like I done gone en fergit it oWn
my mine. Ef I don't disremember," he continued, "11it wuz Miss
Molly Cottontail, en I speck we better let it go at dat."

XXXI A PLANTATION WITCH

The next time the little boy got permission to call upon Uncle
Remus, the old man was sitting in his door, with his elbows on his
knees and his face buried in his hands, and he appeared to be in
great trouble. "what's the matter, Uncle Remus?" the youngster
asked. "Nuff de matter, honey-mo' dan dey's enny kyo fer. Ef dey
ain't some quare gwines on 'roun' dis place I ain't name Remus."
The serious tone of the old man caused the little boy to open his
eyes. The moon, just at its full, cast long, vague, wavering shadows
in front of the cabin. A colony of tree-frogs somewhere in the
distance were treating their neighbors to a serenade, but to the
little boy it sounded like a chorus of lost and long-forgotten
whistlers. The sound was wherever the imagination chose to locate
it-to the right, to the left, in the air, on the ground, far away Or
near at hand, but always dim and always indistinct. Something in
Uncle Remus's tone exactly fitted all these surroundings, and the
child nestled closer to the old man. "Yasser," continued Uncle
Remus, with an ominous sigh and mysterious shake of the head,
"ef dey ain't some quare gwiaes on in dish yer naberhood, den I'm
de ball-headest creetur 'twix' dis en nex' Jinawerry wuz a year 'go,
w'ich I knows I ain't. Dat's what." "What is it, Uncle Remus?" ~
know Mars John bin drivin' Cholly sorter hard ter-day, en I say ter
myse'f dat I'd drap 'round 'bout dus' en fling nudder year er corn in
de troff en kinder gin 'im a techin' up wid de kurrier-koam; en
bless grashus! I ain't bin in de lot mo'n a minnit 'fo' I seed sump'n
wuz wrong wid de hoss, and sho' nuff dar wuz his mane full er
witch-stirrups."

"Full of what, Uncle Remus?"

"Full er witch-stirrups, honey. Ain't you seed no witch-stirrups?
Well, w'en you see two stran' er ha'r tied tergedder in a hoss's
mane, dar you see a witch-stirrup, en, mo'n dat, dat boss done bin
rid by um."

"Do you reckon they have been riding Charley?" inquired the little
boy.

"Co'se, honey. Tooby sho dey is. W'at else dey bin doin'?"

"Did you ever see a witch, Uncle Remus?"

"Dat ain't needer yer ner dar. W'en I see coon track in de branch, I
know de coon bin 'long dar."

The argument seemed unanswerable, and the little boy asked, in a
confidential tone:

"Uncle Remus, what are witches like?"

"Dey comes djihint," responded the cautious old darkey. "Dey
comes en dey cunjus fokes. Squinch-owl hol  ~ ler eve'y time he
see a witch, en w'en you hear de dog howlin' in de middle er de
night, one un um's mighty ap' ter be prowlin' 'roun', Cunjun fokes
kin tell a witch de minnit dey lays. der eyes on it, but dem w'at
ain't canjan, hit's mighty hard ter tell w'en dey see one, kaze dey
might come in de 'pearunce un a cow en all kinder creeturs. I ain't
bin useter no cunjun myse'f, but I bin livin' long nuff fer ter know
w'en you meets up wid a big black cat in de middle er de road, wid
yaller eyeballs, dars yo' witch fresh fum de Ole Boy. En,
fuddermo', I know dat 'tain't proned inter no dogs fer ter ketch de
rabbit w'at use in a beryyin'-groan'. Dey er de mos' ongodlies'
creeturs w'at you ever laid eyes on, continued Uncle Remus, with
unction. "Down dar in Putmon County yo' Unk Jeems, he make
like he gwineter ketch wunner dem dar graveyard rabbits. Sho
nuff, out he goes, en de dogs ain't no mo'n got ter de place fo' up
jump de old rabbit right 'mong urn, en atter ruunin''roun' a time or
two, she skip right tip ter Mars Jeems, en Mars Jeems, he des put
de gun-bairl right on 'er en lammed aloose. Hit tored up de groun'
all 'roun', en de dogs, dey rush up, but dey wa'n't no rabbit dar; but
bimeby Mars Jeems, he seed de dogs tuckin' der tails 'tween der
legs, en he look up, en dar wuz de rabbit caperin' 'roun' on a toom
stone, en wid dat Mars Jeems say he sorter feel like de time done
come w'en yo' gran'ma was 'speck-tin' an him home, en he call off
de dogs en put out. But dem wuz ha'nts. Witches is deze yer kinder
fokes wat kin drap der body en change inter a cat en a wolf en all
kinder creeturs."

"Papa says there ain't any witches," the little boy interrupted.

"Mars John ain't live long ez I is," said Uncle Remus, by way of
comment. "He ain't bin broozin' roun' all hours er de night en day. I
know'd a nigger w'ich his brer wuz a witch, kaze he up'n tole me
how he tuck'n kyo'd 'im; en he kyo'd 'im good, mon."

"How was that?" inquired the little boy.

"Hit seem like," continued Uncle Remus, "dat witch fokes is got a
slit in de back er de neek, en w'en dey wanter change derse'f, dey
des pull de hide over der head same ez if 'twuz a shut, en dar dey
is."

"Do they get out of their skins?" asked the little boy, in an awed
tone.

"Tooby sho, honey. You see yo' pa pull his shut off? Well, dat dez
'zackly de way dey duz. But dish yere nigger w'at I'm tellin' you
'bout, he kyo'd his brer de v'ey fus pass he made at him. Hit got So
dat fokes in de settlement didn't have no peace. De chilluns 'ud
wake up in de mawnins wid der ha'r tangle up, en wid scratches on
um like dey bin thoo a brier-patch, twel bimeby one day de nigger
he 'low dat he'd set up dat night en keep one eye on his brer; en
sho' nuff dat night, des ez de chickens wuz crowin' fer twelve, up
jump de brer and pull off his skin en sail out'n de house in de
shape an a bat, en w'at duz de nigger do but grab up de hide, and
turn it wrong-sudout'ards en sprinkle it wid salt. Den he lay down
en watch fer ter see w'at de news wuz gwineter be. Des 'fo' day yer
come a big black cat in de do', en de nigger git up, he did, en druv
her away. Bimeby, yer come a big black dog snuffin' roan', en de
nigger up wid a chunk en lammed 'im side er de head. Den a
squinch-owi lit on de koam er de house, en de nigger jam de
shovel in de fier en make 'im flew away.

Las', yer come a great big black wolf wid his eyes shinin' liko fier
coals, en he grab de hide and rush out. 'Twa'n't long 'fo' de nigger
year his brer holler'n en squallin', en he tuck a light, he did, en
went out, en dar wuz his brer des a waller'n on de groun' en
squirmin' 'roun', kaze de salt on de skin wuz stingin' wuss'n ef he
had his britches lineded wid yallerjackets. By nex' mawnin' he got
so he could sorter shuffle long, but he gun up cunjun, en ef dere
wuz enny mo' witches in dat settlement dey kep' mighty close, en
dat nigger he ain't skunt hisse'f no mo' not endurin' er my
'membunce."

The result of this was that Uncle Remus had to take the little boy
by the hand and go with him to the "big house," which the old man
was not loath to do; and, when the child went to bed, he lay awake
a long time expecting an unseemly visitation from some
mysterious source. It soothed him, however, to hear the strong,
musical voice of his sable patron, not very far away, tenderly
contending with a lusty tune; and to this accompaniment the little
boy dropped asleep:

"Hit's eighteen hunder'd, forty-en-eight,
Christ done made dat crooked way straight-
En I don't wanter stay here no longer;
Hit's eighteen hunder'd, forty-en-nine, 
Christ done turn dat water inter wine-
En I don't wanter stay here no longer."

XXXII "JACKY-MY-LANTERN" *1

 UPON his next visit to Uncle Remus, the little boy was
exceedingly anxious to know more about witches, but the old man
prudently refrained from exciting the youngster's imagination any
further in that direction. Uncle Remus had a board across his lap,
and, armed with a mallet and a shoe-knife, was engaged in making
shoe-pegs.

"W'iles I wuz crossin' de branch des now," he said, endeavoring to
change the subject, "I come up wid a Jacky-my-lantem, en she wuz
bu'nin' wuss'n a bunch er lightnin'-bugs, mon. I know'd she wuz a
fixin' fer ter lead me inter dat quogmire down in de swamp, en I
steer'd cle'r an' er. Yasser. I did dat. You ain't never seed no
Jacky-my-lanterns, is you, honey?"

The little boy never had, but he had heard of them, and he wanted
to know what they were, and thereupon Uncle Remus proceeded to
tell him.

"One time," said the old darkey, transferring his spectacles from
his nose to the top of his head and leaning his elbows upon his
peg-board, "dere wuz a blacksmif man, en dish yer blacksmif man,
he tuck'n stuck closer by his dram dan he did by his bellus.
Monday mawnin' he'd git on a Spree, en all dat week he'd be on a
spree, en de nex' Monday mawnin' he'd take a fresh start. Bimeby,
one day, atter de black-smif bin spreein''roun' en cussin' might'ly,
he hear a sorter rustlin' fuss at de do', en in walk de Bad Man."

"Who, Uncle Remus?" the little boy asked.

"De Bad Man, honey; de Ole Boy hisse'f right fresh from de ridjun
w'at you year Miss Sally readin' 'bout. He done hide his hawns, en
his tail, en his hoof, en he come dress up like w'ite fokes. He tuck
off his hat en he bow, en den he tell de blacksmif who he is, en dat
he done come atter 'im. Den de black-smif, he gun ter cry en beg,
en he beg so hard en he cry so loud dat de Bad Man say he make a
trade wid 'im. At de een' er one year de sperit er de blacksmif wuz
to be his'n en endurin' er dat time de blacksmif mus' put in his
hottes' licks in de intruss er de Bad Man, en den he put a spell on
de cheer de blacksmif was settin' in, en on his sludge-hammer. De
man w'at sot in de cheer couldn't git up less'n de blacksmif let 'im,
en de man w'at pick up de sludge 'ud hatter keep on knockin' wid it
twel de blacksmif say quit; en den he gun 'im money plenty, en off
he put.

"De blacksmif, he sail in fer ter have his fun, en he have so much
dat he done clean forgot 'bout his contrack, but bimeby, one day he
look down de road, en dar he see de Bad Man comin', en den he
kuow'd de year wuz out. w'en de Bad Man got in de do', de
blacksmif wuz poandin' 'way at a hoss-shoe, but he wa'n't so bizzy
dat he didn't ax 'im in. Dc Bad Man sorter do like he ain't got no
time fer ter tarry, but de blacksmff say he got some little jobs dat
he bleedzd ter finish up, en den he ax de Bad Man fer ter set down
a minnit; en de Bad Man, he tuck'n sot down,  en he sot in dat
cheer w'at he done conju'a en, co'se, dar he wuz. Den de blacksmif,
he 'gun ter poke fun at de Bad Man, en he ax him don't he want a
dram, en won't he hitch his cheer up little nigher de fier, en de Bad
Man, he beg en he beg, but 'twan't doin' no good, kase de
blacksmif 'low dat he gwineter keep 'im dar twel he promus dat he
let 'im off one year mo', en, sho nuff, de Bad Man promus dat ef de
black-smif let 'im up he give 'im a n'er showin'. So den de blacksnif
gun de wud, en de Bad Man sa'nter off down de big road, settin'
traps en layin' his progance fer ter ketch mo' sinners.

"De nex' year hit pass same like t'er one. At de 'p'inted time yer
come de Ole Boy atter de blacksnif, hut still de blackssnif had
some jobs dat he bleedzd ter finish up, en he ax de Bad Man fer ter
take holt er de sludge en he he'p 'im Out; en de Bad Man, he 'low
dat r'er'n be disperlite, he don't keer ef he do hit 'er a biff er two; en
wid dat he grab up de sludge, en dar he wnz 'gin, kase he done
conju'd de sludge so dat whosomedever tuck 'er up can't put 'er
down less'n de blacksmif say de wud. Dey perlaver'd dar, dey did,
twel bimeby de Bad Man he up'n let 'im off n'er year.

"Well, den, dat year pass same ez t'er one. Mont' in en mont' out
dat man wuz rollin' in dram, en bimeby yer come de Bad Man. De
blacksmff cry en he holler, en he rip 'roan' en t'ar his ha'r, but hit
des like he didn't, kase de Bad Man grab 'im up en cram 'im in a
bag en tote 'im off. W'iles dey wuz gwine 'long dey come up wid a
passel er fokes w'at wnz havin' wanner deze yer fote er July
bobbycues, en de Ole Boy, he 'low dat maybe he kin git some
mo' game, en w'at do he do but jine in wid urn. He lines in en he
talk politics same like t'er fokes, twel bimeby diimertime come
'roan', en dey ax 'im up, w'ich 'greed wid his stummuck, en he
pozzit his bag anderneed de table 'longside de udder bags w'at de
hongry fokes'd brung.

"No sooner did de blacksmif git back on de groan' dan he 'gun ter
wuk his way outer de bag. He crope out, he did, en den he tuck'n
change de bag. He tuck'n tuck a n'er bag en lay it down whar dish
yer bag wuz, en den he crope outer de crowd en lay low in de
underbresh.

"Las', w'en de time come fer ter go, de Ole Boy up wid his bag en
slung her on his shoulder, en off he put fer de Bad Place. W'en he
got dar he tuck'n drap de bag off'n his back en call up de imps, en
dey des come a squallin' en a caperin', w'ich I speck dey mus' a bin
hongry. Leas'ways dey des swawm'd 'roan', hollerin' out:

'Daddy, w'at you brung-daddy, w'at you brung?'

"So den dey open de bag, en lo en beholes, out jump a big
bull-dog, en de way he shuck dem little imps wnz a caution, en he
kep' on guyawin' un urn twel de Ole Boy open de gate en t'un 'im
out."

"And what became of the blacksmith?" the little boy asked, as
Uncle Remus paused to snuff the candle with his fingers.

"I'm drivin' on 'roan', honey. Atter 'long time, de blacksmff he
tuck'n die, en w'en he go ter de Good Place de man at de gate
dunner who he is, en he can't squeeze in. Den he go down ter de
Bad Place, en knock. De Ole Boy, he look out, he did, en he
know'd de blacksmif de minnit he laid eyes on 'im; but he shake
his head en say, sezee:

"'You'll hatter skuze me, Brer Blacksrnif, kase I d an had 'speunce
'longer you. You'll hatter go some'rs else ef you wanter raise enny
racket,' sezee, en wid dat he shet do do'.

"En dey do say," con-tinued Uncle Remus, with, unction, "dat
sense dat day de blacksmif bin sorter huv'rin' 'roan' 'twix' de
heavens en de yc'th, en dark nights he shine out so fokes call 'im
Jacky-my-lantun. Dat's w'at dey tells me. Hit may be wrong er't
maybe right, but dat's w'at I years.

*1 This story is popular on the coast and among the rice-
plantations, and, since the publication of some of the animal-myths
in the newspapers, I have received a version of it from a planter in
southwest Georgia; but it seems to me to he an intruder among the
genuine myth-stories of the negroes. It is a trifle too elaborate.
Nevertheless, it is told upon the plantations with great gusto, and
there are several versions in circulation.

XXXIII  WHY THE NEGRO IS BLACK

ONE night, while the little boy was watebing Uncle Remus
twisting and waxing some shoe-thread, he made what appeared to
him to be a very curious discovery. He discovered that the palms
of the old man's hands were as white as his own, and the fact was
such a source of wonder that he at last made it the subject of
remark. The response of Uncle Remus led to the earnest recital of
a piece of unwritten history that must prove interesting to
ethnologists.

"Tooby sho de pa'm er my han's w'ite, honey," he quietly remarked,
"en, w'en it come ter dat, dey wuz a time w'en all de w'ite folks
'uz black-blacker dan me, kaze I done bin yer so long dat I bin
sorter bleach out."

The little boy laughed. He thought Uncle Remus was making him
the victim of one of his jokes; but the youngster was never more
mistaken. The old man was serious. Nevertheless, he failed to
rebuke the ill-timed mirth of the child, appearing to be alto-gether
engrossed in his work. Mter a while, he resumed:

"Yasser. Fokes dunner w'at bin yit, let 'lone w'at  gwinter be.
Niggers is niggers now, but de time wnz w'en we 'uz all niggers
tergedder."

"When was that, Uncle Remus?"

"Way back yander. In dem times we 'uz all an us black; we 'uz all
niggers tergedder, en 'cordin' ter all de 'counts w'at I years fokes 'uz
gittin' 'long 'bout ez well in dem days ez dey is now. But atter 'w'ile
de news come dat dere wuz a pon' er water some'rs in de
naberhood, w'ich ef dey'd git inter dey'd be wash off nice en w'ite,
en den one un urn, he fine de place en make er splange inter de
pon', en come out w'ite ez a town gal. En den, bless grashus! w'en
de fokes seed it, dey make a break fer de pon', en dem w'at wnz de
soopless, dey got in fus' en dey come out w'ite; en dem w'at wuz de
nex' soopless, dey got in nex', en dey come out merlatters; en dey
wuz sech a crowd un um dat dey mighty nigh use de water up,
w'ich w'en dem yuthers come long, de morest dey could do wuz ter
paddle about wid der foots en dabble in it wid der han's. Dem wuz
de niggers, en down ter dis day dey ain't no w'ite 'bout a nigger
'ceppin de pa'ms er der han's en de soles er der foot."

The little boy seemed to be very much interested in this new
account of the origin of races, and he made some further inquiries,
which elicited from Uncle Remus the following additional
particulars:

"De Injun en de Chinee got ter be 'counted 'long er de nierlatter. I
ain't seed no Chinee dat I knows un, but dey tells me dey er sorter
'twix' a brown en a brindle. Dey er all merlatters."

"But mamma says the Chinese have straight hair," the little boy
suggested.

"Co'se, honey," the old man unhesitatingly responded, "dem
w'at git ter de pon' time nuff fer ter git der head in de water, de
water hit onkink der ha'r. Hit bleedzd ter be dat away.

XXXIV  THE SAD FATE OF MR. FOX

"Now, den," said Uncle Remus, with unusual gravity, as soon as
the little boy, by taking his seat, announced that he was ready for
the evening's entertainment to begin; "now, den, dish yer tale w'at
I'm agwine ter gin you is de las' row er stumps, sho. Dish yer's
whar ole Brer Fox los' his breff, en he ain't fine it no mo' down ter
dis day."

"Did he kill himself, Uncle Remus?" the little boy asked, with a
curious air of concern.

"Hole on dar, honey!" the old man exclaimed, with a great
affectation of alarm; "hole on dar! Wait! Gimme room! I don't
wanter tell you no story, en ef you keep shovin' me forrerd, I mout
git some er de facks mix up 'mong deyse'f. You gotter gimme room
en you gotter gimme time."

The little boy had no other premature questions to ask, and, after a
pause, Uncle Remus resumed:

"Well, den, one day Brer Rabbit go ter Brer Fox house, he did, en
he put up mighty po' mouf. He say his ole 'oman sick, en his
chilluns cole, en de fier done gone out. Brer Fox, he feel bad 'bout
dis, en he tuck'n s'ply Brer Rabbit widder chunk er fier. Brer
Rabbit see Brer Fox cookin' some nice beef, en his mouf gun ter
water, but he take de fier, he did, en he put out to'rds home; but
present'y yer he come back, en he say de fier done gone out. Brer
Fox 'low dat he want er invite to dinner, but he don't say nuthi', en
bimeby Brer Rabbit he up'n say, sezee:

"Brer Fox, whar you git so much nice beef? sezee, en den Brer Fox
he up'n 'spon', sezee:

"You come ter my house ter-morrer ef yo' fokes ain't too sick, en I
kin show you whar you kin git plenty beef mo' nicer dan dish yer,'
sezee.

"Well, sho nuff, de nex' day fotch Brer Rabbit, en Brer Fox say,
sezee:

'Der's a man down yander by Miss Meadows's w'at got heap er fine
cattle, en he gotter cow name Bookay,' sezee, Cen you des go en
say Bookay, en she'll open her mouf, en you kin jump in en git des
as much meat ez you kin tote,' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"Well, I'll go 'long,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'en you kin jump fus'
en den I'll come follerin' atter,' sezee.

"Wid dat dey put out, en dey went promernadin' 'roan' 'mong de
cattle, dey did, twel bimeby dey struck up wid de one dey wuz
atter. Brer Fox, he up, he did, en holler Bookay, en de cow flung 'er
mouf wide open. Sho nuff, in dey jump, en w'en dey got dar, Brer
Fox, he say, sezee:

'You kin cut mos' ennywheres, Brer Rabbit, but don't cut 'round' de
haslett,' sezee.

"Den Brer Rabbit, he holler back, he did: Tm a gitten me out a
roas'n-piece,' sezee.

'Roas'n, er bakin', er fryin',' sez Brer Fox, sezee, 'don't git too nigh
de haslett,' sezee.

"Dey cut en dey kyarved, en dey kyarved en dey cut, en w'iles dey
wuz cuttin' en kyarvin', en slashin'  way, Brer Rabbit, he tuck'n
hacked inter de haslett, en wid dat down fell de cow dead.

"'Now, den,' sez Brer Fox, 'we er gone, sho,' sezee.

"'W'at we gwine do?' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"'I'll git in de maul,' sez Brer Fox, 'en you'll jump in de gall,' sezee.

"Nex' mawnin' yer cum de man w'at de cow b'long ter, and he ax
who kill Bookay. Nobody don't say nuthin'. Den de man say he'll
cut 'er open en see, en den he whirl in, en twan't no time 'fo' he had
'er intruls spread out. Brer Rabbit, he crope out'n de gall, en say,
sezee:

"'Mister Man! Oh, Mister Man! I'll tell you who kill yo' cow. You
look in de maul, en dar you'll fine 'im,' sezee.

"Wid dat de man tuck a stick and lam down on de maul so hard dat
he kill Brer Fox stone-dead. W'en Brer Rabbit see Brer Fox wuz
laid out fer good, he make like he mighty sony, en he up'n ax de
man fer Brer Fox head. Man say he ain't keerin', en den Brer
Rabbit tuck'n brnng it ter Brer Fox house. Dar he see ole Miss Fox,
en he tell 'er dat he done fotch her some nice beef w'at 'er ole man
sont 'er, but she ain't gotter look at it twel she go ter eat it.

"Brer Fox son wuz name Tobe, en Brer Rabbit tell Tobe fer ter
keep still w'iles his mammy cook de nice beef w'at his daddy sont
'im. Tobe he wuz mighty hongry, en he look in de pot he did w'iles
de cookin' wuz gwine on, en dar he see his daddy head, en wid dat
he sot up a howl en tole his mammy. Miss Fox, she git mighty mad
w'en she fine she cookin' her ole man head, en she call up de dogs,
she did, en sickt em on Brer Rabbit; en ole Miss Fox en Tobe en
de dogs, dey push Brer Rabbit so close dat he hatter take a holler
tree. Miss Fox, she tell Tobe fer ter stay dar en mine Brer Rabbit,
w'ile she goes en git de ax, en w'en she gone, Brer Rabbit, he tole
Tobe ef he go ter de branch en git 'im a drink er water dat he'll gin
im a dollar. Tobe, he put out, he did, en bring some water in his
hat, but by de time he got back Brer Rabbit done out en gone. Ole
Miss Fox, she cut and cut twel down come de tree, but no Brer
Rabbit dar. Den she lay de blame on Tobe, en she say she gwineter
lash 'im, en Tobe, he put out en run, de ole 'oman atter 'im.
Bimeby, he come up wid Brer Rabbit, en sot down fer to tell 'im
how 'twuz, en w'iles dey wuz a settin' dar, yer come ole Miss Fox a
slippin' up en grab um bofe. Den she tell um w'at she gwine do.
Brer Rabbit she gwineter kill, en Tobe she gwineter lam ef its de
las' ack. Den Brer Rabbit sez, sezee:

"'Ef you please, ma'am, Miss Fox, lay me on de grinestone en
groun off my nose so I can't smell no mo' w'en I'm dead.'

"Miss Fox, she tuck dis ter be a good idee, en she fotch bofe un
urn ter de grinestone, en set urn up on  it so dat she could groun'
off Brer Rabbit nose. Den Brer Rabbit, he up'n say, sezee:

"'Ef you please, ma'am, Miss Fox, Tobe he kin turn de handle
w'iles you goes atter some water fer ter wet de grinestone,' sezee.

"Co'se, soon'z Brer Rabbit see Miss Fox go atter de water, he jump
down en put out, en dis time he git clean away."

"And was that the last of the Rabbit, too, Uncle Remus?" the little
boy asked, with something like a sigh.

"Don't push me too close, honey," responded the old man; "don't
shove me up in no coruder. I don't wanter tell you no stories. Some
say dat Brer Rabbit's ole 'oman died fum eatin' some pizen-weed,
en dat Brer Rabbit married ole Miss Fox, en some say not. Some
tells one tale en some tells nudder; some say da fum dat time
forrer'd de Rabbits en de Foxes make fren's en stay so; some say
dey kep on quollin'. Hit look like it mixt. Let dem tell you w'at
knows. Dat w'at I years you gits it straight like I yeard it."

There was a long pause, which was finally broken by the old man:

"Hit's 'gin de rules fer you ter be noddin' yer, honey. Bimeby you'll
drap off en I'll hatter tote you up ter de big 'ouse. I hear dat baby
cryin', en bimeby Miss Sally'll fly up en be a holler'n atter you"

"Oh, I wasn't asleep," the little boy replied. "I was just thinking."

"Well, dat's diffunt," said the old man. "Ef youil clime up on my
back," he continued, speaking softly, "I speck I ain't too ole fer ter
be yo' hoss fum yer ter de house. Many en many's de time dat I
toted yo' Unk Jeems dat away, en Mars Jeems wuz heavier sot dan
w'at you is."

PLANTATION PROVERBS

BIG 'possum clime little tree.
Dem w'at eats kin say grace.
Ole man Know-All died las' year.
Better de gravy dan no grease 'tall.
Dram ain't good twel you git it.
Lazy fokes' stummucks don't git tired.
Rheumatiz don't he'p at de log-rollin'.
Mole don't see w'at his naber doin'.
Save de pacin' mar' fer Sunday.
Don't rain eve'y time de pig squeal.
Crow en corn can't grow in de same fier.
Tattlin' 'oman can't make de bread rise.
Rails split 'fo' bre'kfus' ll season de dinner.
Dem w'at knows too much sleeps under de ash-hopper.
Ef you wanter see yo' owil sins, clean up a new groun'.
Hog dunner w'ich part un 'ilnil season de turnip salad.
Hit's a blessin' de w'ite sow don't shake de plum-tree.
Winter grape sour, whedder you kin reach 'im or not.
Mighty po' bee dat don't make mo' honey dan he want.
Kwishins on mule's foots done gone out er fashun.
Pigs dunno w'at a pen's fer.
Possum's tail good as a paw.
Dogs don't bite at de front gate.
Colt in de barley-patch kick high.
Jay-bird don't rob his own nes'.
Pullet can't roost too high for de owl.
Meat fried 'fo' day won't las' twel night.
Stump water won't kyo de gripes.
De howlin' dog know w'at he sees.
Bline hoss don't fall w'en he follers de bit.
Hongry nigger won't w'ar his maul out.
Don't fling away de empty wallet.
Black-snake know de way ter de hin nes'.
Looks won't do ter split rails wid.
Settin' hens don't hanker arter fresh aigs.
Tater-vine growin' w'ile you sleep.
Hit take two birds fer to make a nes'.
Ef you bleedzd ter eat dirt, eat clean dirt.
Tarrypin walk fast 'nuff fer to go visitin'.
Empty smoke-house makes de pullet holler.
W'en coon take water he fixin' fer ter fight.
Corn makes mo' at de mill dan it does in de crib.
Good luck say: "Op'n yo' mouf en shet yo' eyes."
Nigger dat gets hurt wukkin oughter show de skyars.
Fiddlin' nigger say hit's long ways ter de dance. 
Rooster makes mo' racket dan de hin w'at lay de aig.
Meller mush-million hollers at you fum over de fence.
Nigger wid a pocket-han'kcher better be looked atter.
Rain-crow don't sing no chune, but youk'n 'pen' on Im.

One-eyed mule can't be handled on de bline side. 
Moon may shine, but a lightered knot's mighty handy.
Licker talks mighty loud w'en it git loose fum de jug.
De proudness un a man don't count w'en his head's cold.
ilongry rooster don't cackle w'en he fine a wum. 
Some niggers mighty smart, but dey can't drive de pidgins ter roos'.
You may know de way, but better keep yo' eyes on de seven stairs.
All de buzzards in de settlement '11 come to de gray mule's funeri.
Youk'n hide de fier, but w'at you gwine do wid de smoke?
Ter-morrow may be de car-ridge-driver's day for ploughin'.
Hit's a mighty deaf nigger dat don't year de dinner-ho'n.
Hit takes a bee fer ter git de sweetness out'n de hoar-houn'
blossom.
Ha'nts don't bodder longer hones' folks, but you better go 'roun' de
grave-yard.
De pig dat runs off wid de year er corn gits little mo' dan decob.
Sleepin' in de fence-cornder don't fetch Chrismus in de kitchen.
De spring-house may freeze, but de niggers 'll keep de shuck-pen
warm.
'Twix' de bug en de bee-martin 'tain't hard ter tell w'ich gwineter
git kotch.
Don't 'sput wid de squinch-owl. Jam de shovel in de fier.
You'd see mo' er de mink ef he know'd whar de yard dog sleeps.
Troubles is seasonin'. 'Simmons ain't good twel dey 'er fros'-bit.
Watch out w'en you'er gittin all you want. Fattenin' hogs ain't in
luck.

HIS SONGS

I REVIVAL HYMN

OH,whar shill we go w'en de great day comes,
Widde blowin' er de trumpits en de bangin' er de drums?
How many po' sinners'l1 be kotched out late 
En fine no latch ter de golden gate?
No use fer ter wait twel ter-morrer!
De sun mnsn't set on yo' sorrer,
Sin's ez sharp ez a bamboo-brier-
Oh, Lord! fetch de mo'ners up higher!

W'en de nashuns er de earf is a stan'in all aroun, 
Who's a gwineter be choosen fer ter w'ar de glory-crown?
Who's a gwine fer ter stan' stiff-kneed en bol'. 
En answer to der name at de callin' er de roll?
You better come now ef you comm -
Ole Satun is loose en a bummin'-
De wheels er distruckshun is a hummin'-
Oh, come long, sinner, ef you comm'!

De song er salvashun is a mighty sweet song,
En de Pairidise win' blow fur en blow strong,
En Aberham's bosom, hit's saft en hit's wide,
En right dar's de place whar de sinners oughter hide!
Oh, you nee'nter be a stoppin' en a lookin';
Ef you fool wid ole Satun youil git took in;
Youil hang on de aidge en get shook in,
Ef you keep on a stoppin' en a lookin'.

De time is right now, en dish yer's de place-
Let de sun er salvashun shine squar' in yo' face;
Fight de battles er de Lord, fight soon en fight late,
En you'll allers fine a latch ter de golden gate.
No use fer ter wait twel ter-morrer,
De sun musn't set on yo' sorrer-
Sin's ez sharp ez a bamboo-brier,
Ax de Lord fer ter fetch you up higher!

II CAMP-MEETING SONG *

OH, de worril is roun' en de worril is wide-
Lord! 'member deze chillun in de mornin'-

Hit's a mighty long ways up de mountain side, 
En dey ain't no place fer dem sinners fer ter hide, 
En dey ain't no place whar sin kin abide,
W'en do Lord shill come in do mornin'! 
Look up en look aroun', 
Fling yo' burden on de groun', 
Hit's a gittin' mighty close on ter mornin'!
Smoove away sin's frown-
Retch up en git de crown, 
W'at do Lord will fetch in de mornin'!

De han' er ridem'shun, hit's hik out ter you-
Lord! 'member dem sinners in do mornin'!
Hit's a mighty pashent han', but de days is but few, 
W'en Satun, he'll come a demandin' un his due, 
En de stiff-neck sinners 'll be smotin' all fru-
Oh, you better git ready for do mornin'!
Look up en set yo' face 
Todes do green hills or grace 
'Fo' do sun rises up in do mornin'-
Oh, you better change yo' base, 
Hits yo' soul's las' race
For do glory dat's a comin' in do mornin'!

Do farmer gits ready w'en de lan's all plowed 
For ter sow dom seeds in de mornin'
De sperrit may be puny en do flesh may be proud, 
But you better cut loose fum de scoffin' crowd,
En jino dose Christuns w'at's a cryin' out loud 
Fer do Lord fer ter come in de momin'!
Shout loud en shout long, 
Lot do ekkoes ans'or strong,
W'on do sun rises up in do mornin'! 
Oh, you allers will be wrong 
Twel you choose ter belong
Tor do Marster w'at's a comin' in do mornin'!

*In the days of slavery, the religious services held by the negroes
who accompanied their owners to the camp-meetings were
marvels of earnestness and devotion.

III CORN-SHUCKING SONG

OH, dofus news you know do da~l bo a breakin'-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango! *1)
An' dofior be a burnin' en' do ash-cake a bakin', 
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
An' do hon'll be a hollorin' en do boss 'll be a wakin'-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
Bettergit up, nigger, en give yo'se'f a shakin'-
(Hi O, Miss Sindy Ann!)

Oh, honey! w'en you see dem ripe stars a fallin'-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
Oh, honey! w'en you year do rain-crow a callin'-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
Oh, honey! w'en you year dat rod calf a bawlin'-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
Den do day time's, a creopin' on a crawlin'-
(Hi O, Miss Sindy Ann!)

For dolos' ell on yard *2 is a huntin' for do mornin', 
(Hi O! git long! go 'way!)
En shell ketch up widdus 'fo' we ever git dis corn in-
(Oh, go 'way, Sindy Ann!)

Oh, honey! w'en you year dat tin horn a tootin' 
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
Oh, honey, w'on you year do squinch owl a hootin'-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
Oh, honey! w'en you year dom little pigs a rootin'-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
Right den she's a comm' a skippin' en a scootin'-
(Hi O, Miss Sindy Ann!)

Oh, honey, w'en you year dat roan mule whickor-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
W'on you see Mister Moon turnin' pale en gittin' sicker-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)

Don hit's time for tor handle dat corn a little quicker-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
Ef you wantor git a smell or old Marstor's jug or licker-
(Hi O, Miss Sindy Ann!)

For do los' oil en yard is a huntin' for do mornin' 
(Hi O! git long! go 'way!)
En shell ketch up widdus 'fo' we ever git dis corn in-
(Oh, go 'way, Sindy Ann!)
You niggors 'cross dar! you bettor stop your dancin'-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
No use for ter come a flingin' un yo' "sha'n'ts" in-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
No use for ter come a flingin' un yo' "can't's" in-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
Kaze dey ain't no time for yo' pattin' nor yo' prancin'! 
(Hi O, Miss Sindy Ann!)

Mr. Rabbit see do Fox, en he sass urn en jaws urn-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
Mr. Fox ketch do Rabbit, on he scratch um en he claws urn-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
En he tar off do hide, en ho chaws urn en he gnyaws urn-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
Same like gal chawin' sweet gum en rozzum-
(Hi O, Miss Sindy Ann!)
For do los' oil en yard is a huntin' for do mornin' 
(Hi O! git 'long! go 'way!)
En she'll ketch up widdus 'fo' we ever git dis corn in-
(Oh, go 'way) Sindy Ann!)

Oh, work on, boys! give doze shucks a mighty wringin'-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
'Fo' do boss come aroun' a dangin' en a dingin'-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)

Git upen move aroun'! sot dom big han's ter swingin'-
(Hey O! Hi O! Up'n down do Bango!)
Git up'n shout loud! lot do w'ite folks year you singin'! 
(Hi O, Miss Sindy Ann!)

For dolos' eli on yard is a huntin' for do mornin' 
(Hi O! git long! go 'way!)
En shell ketch up widdus 'fo' we over git dis corn in. 
(Oh, go 'way Sindy Ann!)

*1 So far as I know, "Bango" is a meaningless term, introduced on
account of its sonorous ruggedness.
*2 The sword and belt in the constellation of Orion.

IV THE PLOUGH-HANDS' SONG 
     (JASPER COUNTY-186O.)

NIGGER mighty happy w'en he layin' by con-
Dat sun's a slantin';
Nigger mighty happy w'en he year do dinnor-ho'n-
Dat sun's a slantin';
En he mo' happy still w'on do night draws on-
Dat sun's a slantin';
Dat sun's a slantin' dos oz sho's you bo'n!
En it's rise up, Primus! fetch anuddor yell:
Dat ole dun cow's dos a shakin' up 'or bell,
En do frogs chunin' up 'fo' do jew done fell:
Good-night, Mr. Kilidee! I wish you mighty well!
-Mr. Kilidee! I wish you mighty well!
-I wish you mighty well!

Do co'n 'll be ready 'g'inst dumplin day-
Dat sun's a slantin';
But nigger gottor watch, en stick, en stay-
Dat sun's a slantin';
Same ezdo boo-martin watchin' un do jay-
Dat sun's a slantin';
Datsun's a slantin' en a slippin' away!
Don it's rise up, Primus! on gin it t'urn strong;
Do cow's gwino home wid dor ding-dang-dong-
Sling in anuddor teteh or do ole-time song:
Good-night, Mr. Whipperwill! don't stay long!
-Mr. Whipperwill! don't stay long!
-Don't stay long!

V CHRISTMAS PLAY-SONG 
    (MYRICK PLACE, PUTNAM COUNTY 1858.)

Hi my rinktum! Black gal sweet,
Same like goodies w'at do w'ito folks oat;
Ho my Riley! don't you tako'n tell 'or name,
En den of sumpin' happen you won't ketch do blame;
Hi my rinktum! bettor tako'n hide yo' plum;
Joree don't holler eve'y time he fine a wum. 
Den it's hi my rinkturn! 
Don't git no udder man;
En it's ho my Riley! 
Fetch out Miss Dilsey Ann!

Ho my Riley! Yaller gal fine;
She may be yone but she oughter be mine!
Hi my rinktum! Lemme git by,
En see w'at she mean by de cut or dat eye!
Ho my Riley! bettor shot dat do'-
Do w'ite folks 'll bloovo we or t'arin up do flo'.

Den it's ho my Riley! 
Come a siftin' up ter me!
En it's hi my rinktum! 
Dis do way tor twis' yo' knee!

Hi my rinktum! Ain't do eas' gittin' red?
Do squinch owl shiver like he wanter go ter bed;
Ho my Riley! but do gals en do boys,
Des now gittin' so doy kin sorter make a noise.
Hi my rinktum! lot do yallor gal lone;
Niggors don't hankerarter sody in do pone.
Den it's hi my rinktum! 
Better try anudder plan; 
An' it's ho my Riley!
Trot out Miss Dilsey Ann!

Ho my Riley! In do happy Chrismus' time
Do niggers shake der cloze a huntin' for a dime.
Hi my rinktum! En den dey shake der feet,
En greaze derse'f wid de good ham meat.
Ho my Riley! dey oat en dey cram,
En bimoby ole Miss 'll be a sendin' out de dram. 
Don it's ho my Riley!
You hear dat, Sam!
En it's hi my rinktum! 
Be a sendin' out do dram!

VI PLANTATION PLAY-SONG 
     (PUTNAM COUNTY-1856.)

HIT'S a gittin' mighty late, w'en de Guinny-hins squall,
En you better dance now, of you gwineter dance a tall,
Fer by dis time tor-morrer night you can't hardly crawl,
Kaze youil hatter take de hoe ag'in en likewise do inaul-
Don't you hear dat bay colt a kickin' in his stall?
Stop yo' humpin' up-yo' sho'lders  do!
Dat'll never do! Hop light, ladies,
Oh, Miss Loo!
Hit takes a heap er scrougin'
For ter git you thoo-
Hop light, ladies,
Oh, Miss Loo!

Ef you niggers don't watch, you'll sing anudder chune,
Fer De sun'll rise'n ketch you ef you don't be mighty soon;
En de stars is gittin' paler, en de ole gray coon
Is a settin' inde grape-vine a watchin' fer do moon. 
W'en a feller comes a knockin'
Des holler-Oh, shoo!
Hoplight, ladies, 
Oh, Miss Loo!
Oh, swing dat yaller gal! 
Do, boys, do!
Hoplight, ladies, 
Oh, Miss Loo!

Oh, tu'n me loose! Lemme 'lone! Go way, now!
W'at you speck I come a dancin' fer of I dunno how?
Deze do ve'y kinder footses w'at kicks up a row;
Can't you jump inter do middle en make yo' gal a bow?
Look at dat merlatter man 
A follerin' up Sue;
Hoplight, ladies,
Oh, Miss Loo!
De boys ain't a gwine
W'en you cry boo hoo-
Hop light, ladies, 
Oh, Miss Loo!

VII TRANSCRIPTIONS *1

1. A PLANTATION CHANT

Hrr's eighteen hunder'd forty-en-fo', 
Christ done open dat He'v'mly do'-
An' I don't wanter stay yer no longer;
Hit's eighteen hunder'd forty-en-five, 
Christ done made dat dead man alive-
An' I don't wanter stay yer no longer.
You ax me ter run home, 
Little childun-
Run home, dat sun done roll-
An' I don't wanter stay yer no longer.

Hit's eighteen hunder'd forty-en-six, 
Christ is got us a place done fix-
An' I don't wanter stay yer no longer;
Hit's eighteen hunder'd forty-en-sev'm 
Christ done sot a table in Hev'm
An' I don't wanter stay yer no longer.

You ax me ter run home, Little childun
Run home, dat sun done roll-
An' I don't wanter stay yer no longer.

Hit's eighteen hunder'd foiiy-en-eight, 
Christ done make dat crooked way straight-
An' I don't wanter stay yer no longer;
Hit's eighteen hunder'd forty-en-nine, 
Christ done tu'n dat water inter wine-
An' I don't wanter stay yer no longer.
You ax me ter run home, 
Little childun-
Run home, dat sun done roll-
An' I don't wanter stay yer no longer.

Hit's eighteen hunder'd forty-en-ten, 
Christ is do mo'ner's onliest fr'en'-
An' I don't wanter stay yer no longer;
Hit's eighteen hunder'd forty-en-lev'm, 
Christ'll be at do do' w'en we all git ter Hev'm-
An' I don't wanter stay yer no longer.
You ax me tor run home, 
Little childun-
Run home, dat sun done roll-
An' I don't wanter stay yer no longer.

*1 If these are adaptations from songs the negroes have caught
from the whites, their origin is very remote. I have transcrihed
them literally, and I regard them as in the highest degree
characteristic.

2.A PLANTION SERENADE

DE ole bee make de honey-comb,
De young bee make de honey,
De niggers make de cotton en co'n,
En de w'ite folks gits de money.

De raccoon he's a cu'us man, 
He never walk twel dark,
En nuthin' never 'sturbs his mine, 
Twel he hear ole Bringer bark.

De raccoon totes a bushy tail, 
De 'possum totes no ha'r,
Mr. Rabbit, ho come skippin' by, 
Ho ain't got none ter spar'.

Monday mornin' break or day, 
W'ite folks got me gwine,
But Sat'dy night, w'en do sun goes down, 
Dat yaller gal's in my mine.

Fifteen poun' or meat a week, 
W'isky for ter sell,
Oh, how can a young man stay at home, 
Dem gals dey look so well?

Met a 'possum in de road-
Bre' 'Possum, whar you gwine?
I thank my stars, I bless my life, 
I'm a huntin' for do muscadine.

VIII THE BIG BETHEL CHURCH

DE Big Bethel chu'ch! do Big Bethel chu'ch! 
Done put ole Satun bohine urn;
Ef a sinner git loose fum enny udder chu'ch, 
De Big Bethel chu'ch will fine urn!

Hit's good tor be doro, en it's sweet ter be dero, 
Wid de sisterin' all aroun' you-
A shakin' dem shackles or mussy en' love 
Wharwid do Lord is boun' you.

Hit's sweet tor be dere on lisson tor de hymos, 
En hear dem mo'ners a shoutin'-
Dey done reach de place whar der ain't no room 
Fer enny mo' weopin' en doubtin'.

Hit's good ter be dere w'en de sinners all jine
Wid de bruddorin in dere singin',
En it look like Gabori gwine ter rack up en blow 
En set dem heav'm bells tor ringin'!

Oh, de Big Bethel chu'ch! de Big Bethel chu'ch, 
Done put olo Satun behine am;
Ef a sinner git loose fum enny udder chu'ch 
De Big Bethel chu'ch will fine urn!

IX  TIME GOES BY TURNS

DAR'S a pow'ful rassle 'twix de Good en de Bad, 
En de Bad's got de all-under holt;
En w'en de wuss come, she come i'on-clad, 
En you hatter hole yo' brof for de jolt.

But des todos de las' Good gits de knee-lock, 
En dey draps ter de groun'-ker flop!
Good had de inturn, en he stan' like a rock, 
En he bleodzd for ter be on top.

De dry woddor breaks wid a big thunder-clap, 
For dey ain't no drout' w'at kin las',
But de seasons w'at whoops up de cotton crap, 
Likewise dey freshens up de grass.

De rain fall so saf' in de long dark night,
Twel you hatter hole yo' han' for a sign,
But de drizzle w'at sets de tater-slips right 
Is de makin' or de May-pop vine.

In de mellerest groun' de clay root'll ketch 
En hole ter de tongue or de plow,
En a pine-pole gate at de gyardin-patch 
Never'll keep out de ole brindle cow.

One en all on us knows who's a pullin' at do bits 
Like de lead-mule dat g'ides by de rein,
En yit, somehow or nudder, de bestest un us gits 
Mighty sick or de tuggin' at de chain.

Hump yo'se'f ter de load en fergit de distress,
En dem w'at stan's by ter scoff,
For de harder de pullin', de longer de res', 
En de bigger de feed in de troff.

A STORY OF THE WAR

WHEN Miss Theodosia Huntingdon, of Burlington, Vermont,
concluded to come South in 1870, she was moved by three
considerations. In the first place, her brother, John Huntingdon,
had become a citizen of Georgia-having astonished his
acquaintances by marrying a young lady, the male members of
whose family had achieved considerable distinction in the
Confederate army; in the second place, she was anxious to explore
a region which she almost unconsciously pictured to herself as
remote and semi-barbarous; and, in the third place, her friends had
persuaded her that to some extent she was an invalid. It was in
vain that she argued with herself as to the propriety of undertaking
the journey alone and unprotected, and she finally put an end to
inward and outward doubts by informing herself and her friends,
including John Huntingdon, her brother, who was practicing law in
Atlanta, that she had decided to visit the South.

When, therefore, on the 12th of October, 1870-the date is duly
recorded in one of Miss Theodosia's letters-she alighted from the
cars in Atlanta, in the midst of a great crowd, she fully expected to
find her brother waiting to receive her. The bells of several
locomotives were ringing, a number of trains were moving in and
out, and the porters and baggage-men were screaming and bawling
to such an extent that for several moments Miss Huntingdon was
considerably confused; so much so that she paused in the hope that
her brother would suddenly appear and rescue her from the smoke,
and dust, and din. At that moment some one touched her on the
arm, and she heard a strong, half-confident, half-apologetic voice
exclaim:

"Ain't dish yer Miss Doshy?"

Turning, Miss Theodosia saw at her side a tall, gray-haired negro.
Elaborating the incident afterward to her friends, she was pleased
to say that the appearance of the old man was somewhat
picturesque. He stood towering above her, his hat in one hand, a
carriage-whip in the other, and an expectant smile lighting up his
rugged face. She remembered a name her brother had often used in
his letters, and, with a woman's tact, she held out her hand, and
said:

"Is this Uncle Remus?"

"Law, Miss Doshy! how you know de ole nigger? I know'd you by
de faver; but how you know me?" And then, without waiting for a
reply: "Miss Sally, she sick in bed, en Mars John, he bleedzd ter go
in de country, en dey tuck'n sont me. I know'd you de minnit I laid
eyes on you. Time I seed you, I say ter myse'f, 'I lay dar's Miss
Doshy,' en, sho nuff, dar you wuz. You ain't gun up yo' checks, is
you? Kaze I'll git de trunk sont up by de 'spress waggin."

The next moment Uncle Remus was elbowing his way
unceremoniously through the crowd, and in a very short time,
seated in the carriage driven by the old man, Miss Huntingdon was
whirling through the streets of Atlanta in the direcfion of her
brother's home. She took advantage of the opportunity to study the
old negro's face closely, her natural curiosity considerably
sharpened by a knowledge of the fact that Uncle Remus had
played an important part in her brother's history. The result of her
observation must have been satisfactory, for presently she laughed,
and said: 

"Uncle Remus, you haven't told me how you knew me in that great
crowd."

The old man chuckled, and gave the horses a gentle rap with the
whip.

"Who? Me! I know'd you by de faver. Dat boy er Mars John's is de
ve'y spit en immij un you. I'd a know'd you in New 'Leens, let lone
down dar in de kyar-shed."

This was Miss Theodosia's introduction to Uncle Remus. One
Sunday afternoon, a few weeks after her arrival, the family were
assembled in the piazza enjoying the mild weather. Mr.
Huntingdon was reading a newspaper; his wife was crooning softly
as she rocked the baby to sleep; and the little boy was endeavoring
to show his Aunt Dosia the outlines of. Kenesaw Mountain
through the purple haze that hung like a wonderfully fashioned
curtain in the sky and almost obliterated the horizon. While they
were thus engaged, Uncle Remus came around the corner of the
house, talking to himself.

"Dey er too lazy ter wuk," he was saying, "en dey specks hones'
fokes fer ter stan' up en s'port um. I'm gwine down ter Putmon
County whar Mars Jeems is-dat's w'at I'm agwine ter do."

"What's the matter now, Uncle Remus?" inquired Mr. Huntingdon,
folding up his newspaper.

"Nuthin' 'tall, Mars John, 'ceppin deze yer sunshine niggers. Dey
begs my terbacker, en borrys my tools, en steals my vittles, en hit's
done come ter dat pass dat I gotter pack up en go. I'm agwine down
ter Putmon, dat's w'at."

Uncle Remus was accustomed to make this threat several times a
day, but upon this occasion it seemed to remind Mr. Huntingdon of
something.

"Very well," he said, "I'll come around and help you pack up, but
before you go I want you to tell Sister here how you went to war
and fought for the Union.-Remus was a famous warrior," he
continued, turning to Miss Theodosia; "he volunteered for one day,
and commanded an army of one. You know the story, but you have
never heard Remus's version.

Uncle Remus shuffled around in an awkward, embarrassed way,
scratched his head, and looked uncomfortable.

"Miss Doshy ain't got no time fer ter set dar an year de ole nigger
run on.

"Oh, yes, I have, Uncle Remus!" exclaimed the young lady; "plenty
of time."

The upshot of it was that, after many ridiculous protests, Uncle
Remus sat down on the steps, and proceeded to tell his story of the
war. Miss Theodosia listened with great interest, but throughout it
all she observed-and she was painfully conscious of the fact, as she
afterward admitted-that Uncle Rcmus spoke from the standpoint of
a Southerner', and with the air of one who expected his hearers to
thoroughly sympathize with him.

"Co'se," said Uncle Remus, addressing himself to Miss Theodosia,
"you ain't bin to Putmon, en you dunner whar de Brad Slaughter
place en Harmony Grove is, but Mars John en Miss Sally, dey bin
dar a time er two, en dey knows how de lan' lays. Well, den, it 'uz
right long in dere whar Mars Jeems lived, en whar he live now.
When de war come long he wnz livin' dere longer Ole Miss en
Miss Sally. Ole Miss 'uz his ma, en Miss Sally dar 'uz his sister. De
war come des like I tell you, en marters sorter rock along same like
dey allers did. Hit didn't strike me dat dey wnz enny war gwine on,
en ef I hadn't sorter miss de nabers, en seed fokes gwine outer de
way fer ter ax de news, I'd a 'lowed ter myse'f dat de war wuz 'way
off 'mong some yuther country. But all dis time de fuss wnz gwine
on, en Mars Jeems, he wnz des eatchin' fer ter put in. Ole Miss en
Miss Sally, dey tuck on so he didn't git off de fus' year, but bimeby
news come down dat times wuz gittin' putty hot, en Mars Jeems he
got up, he did, en say he gotter go, en go he did. He got a overseer
fer ter look atter de place, en he went en jined de army. En he 'uz a
fighter, too, mon, Mars Jeems wnz. Many's en many's de time,"
continued the old man, reflectively, "dat I hatter take'n bresh dat
boy on accounter his 'buzin' en beatin' dem yuther boys. He went
off dar fer ter fight, en he fit. Ole Miss useter call me up Sunday
en read w'at de papers say 'bout Mars Jeems, en it hope 'er up
mightly. I kin see 'er des like it 'uz yistiddy.

Remus,' sez she, 'dish yer's w'at de papers say 'bout my baby,' en
den she'd read out twel she couldn't read fer cryin'. Hit went on dis
way year in en year out, en dem wuz lonesome times, sho's you
bawn, Miss Doshy-lonesome times, sho. Hit got hotter en hotter in
de war, en lonesomer en mo' lonesomer at home, en bimeby 'long
come de conscrip' man, en he des everlas'nly scoop up Mars
Jeems's overseer. W'en dis come 'bout, ole Miss, she sont atter me
en say, sez she:

"'Remus, I ain't got nobody fer ter look arter de place but you,' sez
she, en den I up'n say, sez I:

'Mistiss, you kin des 'pen' on de ole nigger.'

"I wuz ole den, Miss Doshy-let lone w'at I is now; en you better
b'leeve I bossed dem han's. I had dem niggers up en in de fier long
'fo' day, en de way dey did wnk wuz a caution. Ef dey didn't earut
der vittles dat season den I ain't name Remus. But dey wuz tuk
keer un. Dey had plenty er doze en plenty er grub, en dey wuz de
fattes' niggers in de settlement.

"Bimeby one day, Ole Miss, she call me up en say de Yankees
done gone en tuck Atlanty-dish yer ve'y town; den present'y I year
dey wuz a marchin' on down todes Putmon, en, lo en beholesi one
day, de fus news I know'd, Mars Jeems he rid up wid a whole gang
er men. He des stop long nuff fer ter change hosses en snatch a
mouffle er sump'n ter eat, but 'fo' he rid off, he call me up en say,
sez he:

"'Daddy'-all Ole Miss's chilluns call me daddy-'Daddy,' he say,
''pears like dere's gwineter be mighty rough times 'roun' yer. De
Yankees, dey er done got ter Madison en Mounticellar, en 'twon't
be many days 'fo' dey er down yer. 'Tain't likely dey'll pester
mother ner sister; but, daddy, ef de wns come ter de wns, I speck
you ter take keer un um,' sezee.

"Den I say, sez I: 'How long you bin knowin' me, Mars Jeems?' sez
I.

"'S ence I wuz a baby,' sezee.

"'Well, den, Mars Jeems,' sez I, 'you know'd 'twa'nt no use fer ter ax
me ter take keer Ole Miss en Miss Sally.'

"Den he tuck'n squoze my han' en jump on de filly I bin savin' fer
'im, en rid off. One time he tu'n roun' en look like he wanter say
sump'n', but he des waf' his han'-so-en gallop on. I know'd den dat
trouble wuz brewin'. Nigger dat knows he's gwineter git thumped
kin sorter fix hisse'f, en I tuck'n fix up like de war wuz gwineter
come right in at de front gate. I tuck'n got all de cattle en hosses
tergedder en driv' um ter de fo'-mile place, en I tuck all de corn en
fodder en w'eat, en put urn in a crib out dar in de woods; en I bilt
me a pen in de swamp, en dar I put de hogs. Den, w'en I fix all dis,
I put on my Sunday doze en groun' my axe. Two whole days I
groun' dat axe. De grinestone wuz in sight er de gate en close ter
de big 'ouse, en dar I tuck my stan'.

"Bimeby one day, yer come de Yankees. Two un um come fus, en
den de whole face er de yeath swawm'd wid urn. De fus glimpse I
kotch un um, I tuck my axe en march infer Ole Miss settin'-room.
She done had de sidebode move in dar, en I wish I may drap ef
'twuzn't fa'rly blazin' wid silver-silver cups en silver sassers, silver
plates en silver dishes, silver mugs en silver pitchers. Look like ter
me dey wuz fixin' fer a weddin'. Dar sot Ole Miss des ez prim en
ez proud ez ef she own de whole county. Dis kinder hope me up,
kaze I done seed Ole Miss look dat away once befo' w'en de
overseer struck me in de face wid a w'ip. I sot down by de fier wid
my axe tween my knees. Dar we sot w'iles de Yankees ransack de
place. Miss Sally, dar, she got sorter restless, but Ole Miss didn't
skasely bat 'er eyes. Bimeby, we hear steps on de peazzer, en yer
come a couple er young fellers wid strops on der shoulders, en der
sodes a draggin' on de flo', en der spurrers a rattlin'. I won't say I
wuz skeer'd," said Uncle Remus, as though endeavoring to recall
something he failed to remember, "I won't say I wuz skeer'd, kaze I
wuzent; but I wuz took'n wid a mighty funny feelin' in de
naberhood er de gizzard. Dey wuz mighty perlite, dem young
chaps wuz; but Ole Miss, she never tu'n 'er head, en Miss Sally, she
look straight at de fier. Bimeby one un urn see me, en he say,
sezee:
"'Hello, ole man, w'at you doin' in yer?' sezee.

"'Well, boss,' sez I, 'I bin cuttin' some wood fer Ole Miss, en I des
stop fer ter worn my han's a little,' sez I.

"'Hit is cole, dat's a fack,' sezee.

"Wid dat I got up en tuck my stan' behime Ole Miss en Miss Sally,
en de man w'at speak, he went up en worn his han's. Fus thing you
know, he raise up sudden, en say, sezee:

"'W'at dat on yo' axe?'

"'Dat's de fier shinin' on it,' sez I.

"'Hit look like blood,' sezee, en den he laft.

"But, bless yo' soul, dat man wouldn't never laft dat day ef he'd
know'd de wukkins er Remus's mine. But dey didn't bodder nobody
ner tech nuthin', en bimeby dey put out. Well, de Yankees, dey kep'
passin' all de mawnin' en it look like ter me dey wuz a string un
urn ten mile long. Den dey commence gittin' thinner en thinner, en
den atter w'ile we hear skummishin' in de naberhood er Armer's
fe'y, en Ole Miss low how dat wuz Wheeler's men makin' persoot.
Mars Jeems wuz wid dem Wheeler fellers, en I know'd ef dey wuz
dat close I wa'n't doin' no good settm' 'roun' de house toas'n my
shins at de fier, so I des tuck Mars Jeerns's rifle furn behime de do'
en put out ter look atter my stock.

"Seem like I ain't never see no raw day like dat, needer befo' ner
sence. Dey wa'n't no rain, but de wet des sifted down; mighty raw
day. De leaves on de groun' 'uz so wet dey don't make no fuss, en I
got in de woods, en w'enever I year de Yankees gwine by, I des
stop in my tracks en let un pass. I wuz stan'in' dat away in de aidge
er de woods lookin' out cross a clearin', w'en-piff!-out come a little
bunch er blue smoke fum de top er wnnner dem big lonesome-
lookin' pines, en den-pow!

"Sez I ter myse'f, sez I: 'Honey, youer right on my route, en I'll des
see w'at kinder bird you got roostin' in you,' en w'iles I wuz a
lookin' out bus' de smoke-piff! en den-bang! Wid dat I des drapt
back inter de woods, en sorter skeerted 'roun' so's ter git de tree
'twixt' me en de road. I slid up putty close, en wadder you speck I
see? Des ez sho's youer settin' dar lissenin' dey wuz a live Yankee
up dar in dat tree, en he wuz a loadin' en a shootin' at de boys dez
ez cool es a coweumber in de jew, en he had his hoss hitch out in
de bushes, kaze I year de creetur tromplin' 'roun'. He had a
spy-glass up dar, en w'iles I wuz a watchin' un 'im, he raise 'er up
en look thoo 'er, en den he lay 'er down en fix his gun fer ter shoot.
I had good eyes in dem days, ef I ain't got urn now, en way up de
big road I see Mars Jeems a comm'. Hit wuz too fur fer ter see his
face, but I know'd 'im by de filly w'at I raise fer 'im, en she wuz a
prancin' like a school-gal. I know'd dat man wuz gwineter shoot
Mars Jeems ef he could, en dat wnz mo'n I could stan'. Manys en
manys de time dat I nuss dat boy, en hilt 'im in dese arms, en toted
'im on dis back, en w'en I see dat Yankee lay dat gun 'cross a lim'
en take aim at Mars Jeems I up wid my ole rifle, en shet my eyes
en let de man have all she had."

"Do you mean to say," exclaimed Miss Theodosia, indignantly,
"that you shot the Union soldier, when you knew he was fighting
for your freedom?"

"Co'se, I know all about dat," responded Uncle Remus, "en it sorter
made cole chills run up my back; but w'en I see dat man take aim,
en Mars Jeems gwine home ter Ole Miss en Miss Sally, I des
disremembered all 'bout freedom en lammed aloose. En den atter
dat, me en Miss Sally tuck en nuss de inan. right straight along. He
los' one arm in dat tree bizness, but me en Miss Sally we nuss 'im
en we nuss 'im twel he done got well. Des 'bout dat time I quit
nuss'n 'im, but Miss Sally she kep' on. She kep' on," continued
Uncle Remus, pointing to Mr. Huntingdon, "en now dar he is."

"But you cost him an arm," exclaimed Miss Theodosia.

"I gin 'im dem," said Uncle Remus, pointing to Mrs. Huntingdon,
"en I gin 'im deze"-holding up his own brawny arms. "En ef dern
ain't nuff fer enny man den I done los' de way."

HIS SAYINGS

I  JEEMS ROBER'SON'S LAST ILLNESS

A Jonesboro negro, while waiting for the train to go out, met up
with Uncle Remus. After the usual "time of day" had been passed
between the two, the former inquired about an acquaintance.

"How's Jeems Rober'son?" he asked. 

"Ain't you year 'bout Jim?" asked Uncle Remus.

"Dat I ain't," responded the other; "I ain't hear talk er Jem sence he
cut loose fum de chain-gang. Dat w'at make I ax. He ain't down
wid de biliousness, is he?" 

"Not dat I knows un, responded  Uncle  Remus, gravely. "He ain't
sick, an' he ain't bin sick. He des tuck'n say he wuz gwineter ride
dat ar roan mule er Mars John's de udder Sunday, an' de mule, she
up'n do like she got nudder ingagement. I done bin fool wid dat
mule befo', an' I tuck'n tole Jim dat he better not git tangle up wid
'er; but Jim, he up'n 'low dat he wuz a hoss-doctor, an' wid dat he
ax me fer a chaw terbarker, en den he got de bridle, en tuck'n
kotch de mule en got on her- Well," continued Uncle Remus,
looking uneasily around, "I speck you better go git yo' ticket. Dey
tells me dish yer train goes a callyhootin'."

"Hole on dar, Uncle Remus; you ain't tell me 'bout Jim," exclaimed
the Jonesboro negro.

"I done tell you all I knows, chile. Jim, he tuck'n light on de mule,
an' de mule she up'n hump 'erse'f, an den dey wuz a skuffle, an'
w'en de dus' blow 'way, dar lay de nigger on de groun', an' de mule
she stood eatin' at de troff wid wunner Jim's gallusses wrop 'roun'
her behime-leg. Den atterwuds, de ker'ner, he come 'roun', an' he
tuck'n gin it out dat Jim died sorter accidental like. Hit's des like I
tell you: de nigger wern't sick a minnit. So long! Bimeby you won't
ketch yo' train. I got ter be knockin' long."

II UNCLE REMUS'S CHURCH EXPERIENCE

THE deacon of a colored church met Uncle Remus recently, and,
after some uninteresting remarks about the weather, asked:

"How dis you don't come down ter chu'ch no mo', Brer Remus? We
er bin er havin' some mighty 'reshen' times lately."

"Hit's bin a long time sence I bin down dar, Brer Rastus, an' hit'll
be longer. I done got my dose."

"You ain't done gone an' unjined, is you, Brer Remus?"

"Not zackly, Brer Rastus. I des tuck'n draw'd out. De members 'uz
a blame sight too mutuel fer ter suit my doctrines."

"How wuz dat, Brer Remus?"

"Well, I tell you, Brer Rastus. W'en I went ter dat chu'ch, I went
des ez umbill ez de nex' one. I went dar fer ter sing, an' fer ter pray,
an' fer ter wushup, an' I mos' giner'lly allers had a stray shin-
plarster w'ich de ole 'oman say she want sont out dar ter dem
cullud fokes 'cross de water. Hit went on dis way twel bimeby, one
day, de fus news I know'd der was a row got up in de amen
cornder. Brer Dick, he nounced dat dey wem't nuff money in de
box; an' Brer Sim said if dey wern't he speck Brer Dick know'd
whar it disappeared ter; an' den Brer Dick 'low'd dat he won't stan'
no 'probusness, an' wid dat he haul off an' tuck Brer Sim under de
jaw-ker blap! -an' den dey clinched an' drapped on de flo' an' fout
under de benches an' 'mong de wimmen.

"'Bout dat time Sis Tempy, she lipt up in de a'r, an' sing out dat she
done gone an tromple on de Ole Boy, an' she kep' on lippin' up an'
slingin' out 'er han's twel bimeby-blip!-she tuck Sis Becky in de
mouf, an' den Sis Becky riz an' fetch a grab at Sis Tempy, an' I
'clar' ter grashus ef didn't 'pear ter me like she got a poun' er wool.
Atter dat de revivin' sorter het up like. Bofe un um had kin 'mong
de mo'ners, an' ef you ever see skufflin' an' scramblin' hit wuz den
an' dar. Brer Jeems Henry, he mounted Brer Plato an' rid 'im over
de railin', an' den de preacher he start down fum de pulpit, an' des
ez he wuz skippin' onter de flatform a hyme-book kotch 'im in de
bur er de year, an I be bless ef it didn't soun' like a bung-shell'd
busted. Des den, Brer Jesse, he riz up in his seat, sorter keerless
like, an' went down inter his britches atter his razer, an' right den I
know'd sho' nuff trubble wuz begun. Sis Dilsey, she seed it herse'f,
an' she tuck'n let off wunner dem hallyluyah hollers, an' den I
disremember w'at come ter pass.

"I'm gittin' sorter ole, Brer Rastus, an' it seem like de dus' sorter
shet out de pannyrammer. Fuddermo', my lim's got ter akin, mo'
speshully w'en I year Brer Sim an' Brer Dick a snortin' and a
skufflin' under de benches like ez dey wuz sorter makin' der way
ter my pew. So I kinder hump myse'f an' scramble out, and de fus
man w'at I seed was a pleeceman, an' he had a nigger 'rested, an' de
fergiven name er dat nigger wuz Remus."

"He didn't 'res' you, did he, Brer Remus?"

"Hit's des like I tell you, Brer Rastus, an' I hatter git Mars John fer
to go inter my bon's fer me. Hit ain't no use fer ter sing out chu'ch
ter me, Brer Rastus. I done bin an' got my dose. W'en I goes ter
war, I wanter know w'at I'm a doin'. I don't wanter git hemmed up
'mong no wimmen and preachers. I wants elbow-room, an I'm
bleedzd ter have it. Des gimme elbow-room."

"But, Brer Remus, you ain't-"

"I mout drap in, Brer Rastus, an' den ag'in I moutn't, but w'en you
duz see me santer in de do', wid my specs on, youk'n des say to de
congergashun, sorter familious like, 'Yer come ole man Remus wid
his hoss-pistol, an' ef dar's much uv a skuffle 'roun' yer dis evenin'
youer gwineter year fum 'im.' Dat's me, an' dat's what you kin tell
um. So long! Member me to Sis Abby."
                                   
III  UNCLE REMUS AND THE SAVANNAH DARKEY

THE notable difference existing between the negroes in the
interior of the cotton States and those on the seaboard-a difference
that extends to habits and opinions as well as to dialect-has given
rise to certain ineradicable prejudices which are quick to display
themselves whenever an opportunity offers. These prejudices were
forcibly, as well as ludicrously, illustrated in Atlanta recently. A
gentleman from Savannah had been spending the summer in the
mountains of north Georgia, and found it convenient to take along
a body-servant. This body-servant was a very fine specimen of the
average coast negro-sleek, well-conditioned, and consequential-
disposed to regard with undisguised contempt every-thing and
everybody not indigenous to the rice-growing region-and he
paraded around the streets with quite a curious and critical air.
Espying Uncle Remus languidly sunning himself on a corner, the
Savannah darkey approached.

"Mornin', sah."

"I'm sorter up an' about," responded Uncle Remus, carelessly and
calmly. "How is you stannin' it?"

"Tanky you, my helt mos' so-so. He mo' hot dun in de mountain.
Seem so lak man mus' git need *1 de shade. I enty fer see no
rice-bud in dis pa'ts."

"In dis w'ich?" inquired Uncle sudden affectation of interest.

"In dis pa'ts. In dis country. Da plenty in Sawanny."

"Plenty whar?"

"Da plenty in Sawanny. I enty fer see no crab an' no oscher; en
swimp, he no stay 'roun'. I lak some rice-bud now.

"Youer talkin' 'bout deze yer sparrers, w'ich dey er all head, en
'lev'm un makes one mouffle,*2  I speck," suggested Uncle
Remus. "Well, dey er yer," he continued, "but dis ain't no climate
whar de rice-birds flies inter yo' pockets en gits out de money an'
makes de change derse'f; an' de isters don't shuck off der shells en
run over you on de street, an' no mo' duz de s'imp hull derse'f an'
drap in yo' mouf. But dey er yer, dough. De scads 'll fetch um."

"Him po' country fer true," commented the Savannah negro; "he no
like Sawanny. Down da, we set need de shade an' eaty de rice-bud,
an' de crab, an' de swimp tree time de day; an' de buckra man
drinky him wine, an' smoky him seegyar all troo de night. Plenty
fer eat an' not much fer wuk."

"Hit's mighty nice, I speck," responded Uncle Remus, gravely. "De
nigger dat ain't hope up 'longer high feedin' ain't got no grip. But
up yer whar fokes is gotter scramble 'roun' an' make der own livin',
de vittles wat's kumerlated widout enny sweatin' mos' allers
generily b'longs ter some yuther man by rights. One hoe-cake an' a
rasher er middlin' meat las's me fum Sunday ter Sunday, an' I'm in
a mighty big streak er luck w'en I gits dat."

The Savannah negro here gave utterance to a loud, contemptuous
laugh, and began to fumble somewhat ostentatiously with a big
brass watch-chain.

"But I speck I struck up wid a payin' job las' Chuseday," continued
Uncle Remus, in a hopeful tone.

"Wey you gwan do?"

"Oh, I'm a waitin' on a culled gemmun fum Savannah-wunner deze
yer high livers you bin tellin' 'bout."

"How dat?"

"I loant 'im two dollars," responded Uncle Remus, grimly, "an' I'm
a waitin' on 'im fer de money. Hit's wunner deze yer jobs w'at las's
a long time."

The Savannah negro went off after his rice-birds, while Uncle
Remus leaned up against the wall and laughed until he was in
imminent danger of falling down from sheer exhaustion.

*1 Underneath.
*2 Mouthful.

TURNIP SALAD AS A TEXT

As Uncle Remus was going down the street recently he was
accosted by several acquaintances.

"Heyo!" said one, "here comes Uncle Remus. He look like he
gwine fer ter set up a bo'din-house."

Several others bantered the old man, but he appeared to be in a
good humor. He was carrying a huge basket of vegetables.

"How many er you boys," said he, as he put his basket down, "is
done a han's turn dis day? En yit de week's done commence. I year
talk er niggers dat's got money in de bank, but I lay hit ain't none
er you fellers. Whar you speck you gwineter git yo' dinner, en how
you speck you gwineter git 'long?"

"Oh, we sorter knocks 'roun' an' picks up a livin'," responded one.

"Dat's w'at make I say w'at I duz," said Uncle Rcmus. "Fokes go
'bout in de day-time an' makes a livin', an' you come 'long w'en dey
er res'in' der bones an' picks it up. I ain't no han' at figgers, but I lay
I k'n count up right yer in de san' en number up how menny days
hitil be 'fo' you'er cuppled on ter de chain-gang."

"De ole man's holler'n now sho'," said one of the listeners, gazing
with admiration on the venerable old darkey.

"I ain't takin' no chances 'bout vittles. Hit's proned inter me fum de
fus dat I got ter eat, en I knows dat I got fer ter grub for w'at I gits.
Hit's agin de mor'l law fer niggers fer ter eat w'en dey don't wuk,
an' w'en you see um 'pariently fattenin' on a'r, you k'n des bet dat
ruinashun's gwine on some'rs. I got mustard, en poke salid, en
lam's quarter in dat baskit, en me en my ole 'oman gwineter sample
it. Ef enny you boys git a invite you come, but ef you don't you
better stay 'way. I gotter muskit out dar w'at's used ter persidin'
'roun' whar dey's a cripple nigger. Don't you fergit dat off'n yo'
mine."

V A CONFESSION

"W'AT'S dis yer I see, great big niggers gwine 'lopin' 'roun' town
wid cakes 'n pies fer ter sell?" asked Uncle Remus recently, in his
most scornful tone.

"That's what they are doing," responded a young man; "that's the
way they make a living."

"Dat w'at make I say w'at I duz-dat w'at keep me grumlin' w'en I
goes in cullud fokes s'ciety. Some niggers ain't gwine ter wuk
nohow, an' hit's flingin' way time fer ter set enny chain-gang traps
fer ter ketch um."

"Well, now, here!" exclaimed the young man, in a dramatic tone,
"what are you giving us now? Isn't it just as honest and just as
regular to sell pies as it is to do any other kind of work?"

"'Tain't dat, boss:' said the old man, seeing that he was about to be
cornered; 'tain't dat. Hit's de nas'ness un it w'at gits me."

"Oh, get out!"

"Dat's me, boss, up an' down. Ef dere's ruinashun ennywhar in de
known wurril, she goes in de comp'ny uv a hongry nigger w'at's a
totin' pies 'roun.' Sometimes w'en I git kotch wid emptiness in de
pit er de stummuck, an' git ter fairly honin' arter sumpin' w'at got
substance in it, den hit look like unto me dat I kin stan' flat-footed
an' make more cle'r money eatin' pies dan I could if I wuz ter sell
de las' one 'twixt dis an' Chrismus. An' de nigger w'at k'n trapes
'round wid pies and not git in no alley-way an' sample um, den I'm
bleedzd ter say dat nigger out-niggers me an' my famby. So dar
now!"

VI UNCLE REMUS WITH THE TOOTHACHE

WHEN Uncle Remus put in an appearance one morning recently,
his friends knew he had been in trouble. He had a red cotton
handkerchief tied under his chin, and the genial humor that usually
makes his aged face its dwelling-place had given way to an
expression of grim melancholy. The young men about the office
were inclined to chaff him, but his look of sullen resignation
remained unchanged.

"What revival did you attend last night?" inquired one.

"What was the color of the mule that did the hammering?" asked
another.

"I always told the old man that a suburban chicken coop would fall
on him," remarked some one.

"A strange pig has been squealing in his ear," suggested some one
else.

But Uncle Remus remained impassive. He seemed to have lost all
interest in what was going on around him, and he sighed heavily as
he seated himself on the edge of the trash-box in front of the
office. Finally some one asked, in a sympathetic tone:

"What is the matter, old man? You look like you'd been through
the mill."

"Now you'er knockin' ain't bin thoo de mill sence day 'fo' yis tiddy,
den dey ain't no mills in de lan'. Ef wunner deze yer scurshun
trains had runned over me I  couldn't er bin wuss off. I bin
trompin' 'roun' in de lowgroun's now givine on seventy-fl' year,
but I ain't see no sich times ez dat w'at I done spe'unst now. Boss,
is enny er you all ever rastled wid de toofache?"

"Oh, hundreds of times! The toothache isn't any-thing."

"Den you des played 'roun' de aidges. You ain't had de kine w'at
kotch me on de underjaw. You mout a had a gum-bile, but you
ain't bin boddered wid de toofache. I wnz settin' up talkin' wid my
ole 'oman, kinder puzzlin' 'roun' fer ter see whar de nex' meal's
vittles wnz a gwineter cum fum, an' I feel a little ache sorter
crawlin' 'long on my jaw-bone, kinder feelin' his way. But de ache
don't stay long. He sorter hankered 'roun' like, en den crope back
whar he come fum. Bimeby I feel 'im comin' agin, an' dis time hit
look like he come up closer-kinder skummishin' 'roun' fer ter see
how de lan' lay. Den he went off. Present'y I feel 'im comin', an' dis
time hit look like he kyar'd de news unto Mary, fer hit feel like der
wuz anudder wun wid 'im. Dey crep' up an' crep' 'roun', an, den dey
crope off. Bimeby dey come back, an' dis time dey come like dey
wuzent 'fear'd er de s'roundin's, fer dey trot right up unto de toof,
sorter zamine it like, an' den trot all roun' it, like deze yer circuous
hosses. I sot dar mighty ca'm, but I spected dat sump'n' wuz givine
ter happ'n."

"And it happened, did it?" asked some one in the group
surrounding the old man.

"Boss, don't you fergit it," responded Uncle Remus, fervidly. "W'en
dem aches gallop back dey galloped fer ter stay, an' dey wuz so
mixed up dat I couldn't tell one fum de udder. All night long dey
racked an' dey galloped, an' w'en dey got tired er rackin' an'
gallopin', dey all close in on de ole toof an' thumped it an' gouged
at it twel it 'peared unto me dat dey had got de jaw-bone loosened
up, an' wuz tryin' fer ter fetch it up thoo de top er my head an' out
at der back er my neck. An' dey got wuss nex' day. Mars John, he
seed I wnz 'stracted, an' he tole me fer ter go roun' yere an' git
sump'n' put on it, an' de drug man he lowed dat I better have 'er
draw'd, an' his wuds wuzent more'n cole 'fo' wunner deze yer
watch-youmaycollums-wunner deze dentis' mens-had retched fer it
wid a pa'r er tongs w'at don't tu'n loose w'en dey ketches a holt.
Leas'ways dey didn't wid me. You oughter seed dat toof, boss. Hit
wuz wunner deze yer fo'-prong fellers. Ef she'd a grow'd wrong
eend out'ard, I'd a bin a bad nigger long arter I jin'd de chu'ch. You
year'd my ho'n!"

VII THE PHONOGRAPH

"UNC REMUS," asked a tall, awkward-looking negro, who was
one of a crowd surrounding the old man, "w'at's dish 'ere w'at dey
calls de fonygraf-dish yer inst'ument w'at kin holler 'roun' like little
chillun in de back yard?"

"I ain't seed um," said Uncle Remus, feeling in his pocket for a
fresh chew of tobacco. "I ain't seed tim, but I year talk un um. Miss
Sally wuz a readin' in de papers las' Chuseday, an' she say dat's it's
a mighty big watchyonmaycollum."

'A mighty big w'ich?" asked one of the crowd.

"A mighty big w'atzisname," answered Uncle Remus, cautiously. "I
wuzent up dar close to whar Miss Sarah wuz a readin', but I kinder
geddered in dat it wuz one er deze 'ere w'atzisnames w'at you
hollers inter one year an it comes out er de udder.  Hit's  mighty      
-funny unter me how dese fokes kin go an' proguosticate der
eckoes inter one er dez yer i'on boxes, an' dar hit'll stay on twel de
man comes long an' tu'ns de handle an' let's de fuss come pilin' out.
Bimeby deyll git ter makin' sho' nuff fokes, an' den dere'll be a
racket 'roun' here. Dey tells me dat it goes off like one er deze yer
torpedoes."

"You year dat, don't you?" said one or two of the younger negroes.

"Dat's w'at dey tells me," continued Uncle Remus. "Dat's w'at dey
sez. Hit's one er deze yer kinder w'atzisnames w'at sasses back w'en
you hollers at it."

"W'at dey fix um fer, den?" asked one of the practical negroes.

'Dat's w'at I wanter know," said Uncle Remus, contemplatively.
"But dat's w'at Miss Sally wnz a readin' in de paper. All you gotter
do is ter holler at de box, an' dar's yo' remarks. Dey goes in, an' dar
dey er tooken and dar dey hangs on twel you shakes de box, an'
den dey draps out des ez fresh ez deze yer fishes w'at you git fum
Savannah, an' you ain't got time fer ter look at dere gills, nudder."

VIII RACE IMPROVEMENT

"Dere's a kind er limberness 'bout niggers dese days dat's mighty
cu'us," remarked Uncle Remus yesterday, as he deposited a pitcher
of fresh water upon the exchange table. "I notisses it in de
alley-ways an on de street-cornders. Dey er rackin' up, mon, deze
yer cullud fokes is."

"What are you trying to give us now?" inquired one of the young
men, in a bilious tone.

"The old man's mind is wandering," said the society editor,
smoothing the wrinkles out of his lavender kids.

Uncle Remus laughed. I speck I is a gittin' mo frailer dan I wnz 'fo'
de fahmin days wuz over, but I sees wid my eyes an' I years wid
my year, same ez enny er dese yer young bucks w'at goes a
gallopin' roun' huntin' up devilment, an' w'en I sees de limberness
er dese yer cullud people, an' w'en I sees how dey er dancin' up,
den I gits sorter hopeful. Dey er kindcr ketchin' up wid me."

"How is that?"

"Oh, dey er movin'," responded Uncle Remus. "Dey er sorter
comin' 'roun'. Dey er gittin' so dey bleeve dat dey ain't no better dan
de w'ite fokes. W'en freedom come out de niggers sorter got dere
humps up, an' dey staid dat way, twel bimeby dey begun fer ter git
hongry, an' den dey begun fer ter drap inter line right smartually;
an' now, conhnued the old man, emphatically, "dey er des ez
palaverous ez dey wuz befo' de war. Dey er gittin' on solid groun',
mon."

"You think they are improving, then?"

"Youer chawin' guv'nment now, boss. You slap de law onter a
nigger a time er two, an' lam 'im dat he's got fer to look after his
own rashuns an' keep out'n udder fokes's chick'n-coops, an' sorter
coax 'im inter de idee dat he's got ter feed 'is own chilluns, an' I be
blessed ef you ain't got 'im on risin' groun'. An', mo'n dat, w'en he
gits holt er de fack dat a nigger k'n have yaller fever same ez w'ite
folks, you done got 'im on de mo'ners' bench, an' den ef you come
down Strong on de p'int dat he oughter stan' fas' by de fokes w'at
hope him w'en he wnz in trouble de job's done. W'en you does dat,
ef you ain't got yo' han's on a new-made nigger, den my name ain't
Remus.
an' ef dat name's bin changed I ain't seen her abbertized,"

IX IN THE ROLE OF A TARTAR

A CHARLESTON negro who was in Atlanta on the Fourth of July
made a mistake. He saw Uncle Remus edging his way through the
crowd, and thought he knew him.

"Howdy, Daddy Ben?" the stranger exclaimed. "I tink I nubber see
you no mo'. Wey you gwan? He hot fer true, ain't he?"

"Daddy who?" asked Uncle Remus, straightening himself up with
dignity. "W'ich?"

"I know you in Charrson, an' den in Sewanny. I spec I dun grow
away from 'membrance."

"You knowed me in Charlstun, and den in Savanny?"

"He been long time, ain't he, Daddy Ben?"

"Dat's w'at's a pesterin' un me. How much you reckon you know'd
me?"

"He good while pas'; when I wer' pickaninny. He long time ago.
Wey you gwan, Daddy Ben?"

"W'at does you season your recollection wid fer ter make it hole on
so?" inquired the old man.

"I dunno. He stick hese'f. I see you comm' 'long 'n I say 'Dey
Daddy Ben.' I tink I see you no mo', an' I shaky you by de han'.
Wey you gwan? Dey no place yer wey we git wine?"

Uncle Remus stared at the strange darkey curiously for a moment,
and then he seized him by the arm.

"Come yer, son, whar dey ain't no folks an' lemme drap some
Jawjy 'intment in dem years er yone. Youer mighty fur ways fum
home, an' you wanter be a lookin' out fer yo'se'f. Fus and fo'mus,
youer thumpin' de wrong watermillion. Youer w'isslin' up de
wrong chube. I ain't tromped roun' de country much. I ain't bin
to Charlstun an' needer is I tuck in Savanny; but you couldn't rig up
no game on me dat I wouldn't tumble on to it de minit I laid my
eyeballs on you. W'en hit come to dat I'm ole man Tumbler, fum
Tumblersville-I is dat. Hit takes one er deze yer full-blooded w'ite
men fur ter trap my jedgment. But w'en a nigger comes a jabberin'
'roun' like he got a mouf full er rice straw, he ain't got no mo'
chance long side er me dan a sick sparrer wid a squinch-owl. You
gutter travel wid a circus 'fo' you gits away wid me. You better go
long an' git yo' kyarpet-sack and skip de town. Youer de freshest
nigger w'at I seen yit."

The Charleston negro passed on just as a police-man' came up.

"Boss, you see dat smart Ellick?"

"Yes, what's the matter with him?"

"He's one er deze yer scurshun niggers from Charistun. I seed you a
stannin' over agin de cornder yander, an' ef dat nigger'd a drawd his
monty kyards on me, I wuz a gwineter holler fer you. Would youer
come, boss?"

"Why, certaiuly, Uncle Remus."

"Dat's w'at I lowd. Little more'n he'd a bin aboard er de wrong
waggin. Dat's Wat he'd a bin."

X A CASE OF MEASLES

"YOU'VE been looking like you were rather under the weather for
the past week or two, Uncle Remus," said a gentleman to the old
man.

"You'd be sorter puny, too, boss, if you'der bin whar I bin."

"Where have you been?"

"Pear ter me like ev'eybody done year 'bout dat. Dey ain't no ole
nigger my age an' size dat's had no rattliner time dan I is."

"A kind of picnic?"

"Go long, boss! w'at you speck I be doin' sailin' 'roun' ter dese yer
cullud picnics? Much mo' an' I wouldn't make bread by wulkiin
fer't, let 'lone follerin' up a passel er boys an' gals all over keration.
Boss, ain't you year 'bout it, sho' 'nuff?"

"I haven't, really. What was the matter?"

"1 got strucken wid a sickness, an' she hit de ole nigger a joe-darter
'fo' she tu'n 'im loose."

"What kind of sickness?"

"Hit look sorter cu'ous, boss, but ole an' steddy ez I is, I tuck'n
kotch de meezies."

"Oh, get out! You are trying to get up a sensation."

"Hit's a natal fack, boss, I declar' ter grashus ef 'tain't. Dey sorter
come on wid a cole, like-leas'ways dat's how I commence fer ter
suffer, an' den er koff got straddle er de cole-one dese yer koffs
w'at look like bit goes ter de foundash'n. I kep' on linger'n' 'roun'
sorter keepin' one eye on the rheumatiz an' de udder on de
distemper, twel, bimeby, I begin fer ter feel de trestle-wuk give
way, an' den I des know'd dat I wnz givineter gitter racket. I slipt
inter bed one Chuseday night, an' I never slip out no mo' fer mighty
nigh er mont'.

"Nex' mornin' de meezles 'd done kivered me, an' den ef I didn't git
dosted by de ole 'oman I'm a Chinee. She gimme back rashuns er
sassafac tea. I des natally hankered an' got hongry atter water, an
ev'y time I sing out fer water I got b'ilin' hot sassafac tea. Hit got so
dat w'en I wake up in de mornin' de ole 'oman 'd des come long
wid a kittle er tea an' fill me up. Dey tells me 'roun' town dat
chilluns don't git hurted wid de meezles, w'ich ef dey don't I wanter
be a baby de nex' time dey hits dis place. All dis yer meezies
bizuess is bran'-new ter me. In ole times, 'fo' de wah, I ain't heer
tell er no seventy-fi'-year-ole nigger grapplin' wid no meezies. Dey
ain't ketchin' no mo', is dey, boss?"

"Oh, no-I suppose not."

'Kase ef dey is, youk'n des put my name down wid de migrashun
niggers."

XI THE EMIGRANTS

WHEN Uncle Remus went down to the passenger depot one
morning recently, the first sight that caught his eye was an old
negro man, a woman, and two children sitting in the shade near the
door of the baggage-room. One of the children was very young,
and the quartet was altogether ragged and forlorn-looking. The
sympathies of Uncle Remus were immediately aroused. He
approached the group by forced marches, and finally unburdened
his curiosity.

"Whar is you m'anderin' unter, pard?"

The old negro, who seemed to be rather suspicious, looked at
Uncle Remus coolly, and appeared to be considering whether he
should make any reply. Finally, however, he stretched himself and
said:

"We er gwine down in de naberhoods er Tallypoosy, an we ain't
makin' no fuss 'bout it, nudder."

"I disremember," said Uncle Remus, thoughifully, "whar
Tallypoosy is."

"Oh, hit's out yan," replied the old man, motioning his head as if it
was just beyond the iron gates of the depot. "Hit's down in Alabam.
When we git dar, maybe well go on twel we gits ter Massasip."

"Is you got enny folks out dar?" inquired Uncle Remus.

"None dat I knows un."

"An' youer takin' dis 'oman an' deze chillun out dar whar dey dunno
nobody? Whar's yo' perwisions?" eying a chest with a rope around
it.

"Dem's our beddoze,"  the  old negro  explained, noticing the
glance of Uncle Remus. "All de vittles what we got we e't 'fo' we
started."

"An' you speck ter retch dar safe an soun'? Whar's yo' ticket?"

"Ain"t got none. De man say ez how dey'd pass us thoo. I gin a
man a fi'-dollar bill 'fo' I lef' Jonesboro, an' he sed dat settled it."

"Lemme tell you dis," said Uncle Remus, straightening up
indignantly: "you go an' rob somebody an' git on de chain-gang, an'
let de 'oman scratch 'roun' yer an' make 'er livin'; but don't you git
on dem kyars-don't you do it. Yo' bes' holt is de chain-gang. You
kin make yo' livin' dar w'en you can't make it no whars else. But
don't you git on dem kyars. Ef you do, youer gone nigger. Ef you
ain't got no money fer ter walk back wid, you better des b'ir yo' nes'
right here. I'm a-talkin' wid de bark on. I done seed deze yer
Arkinsaw emmygrants come lopein' back, an' some un 'em didn't
have rags nuff on 'em fer ter hide dere nakidness. You leave dat
box right whar she is, an, let de 'oman take wun young un an you
take de udder wun, an' den you git in de middle er de big road an'
pull out fer de place whar you come fum. I'm preachin' now.

Those who watched say the quartet didn't take the cars.

XII AS A MURDERER

UNCLE Remus met a police officer recently.

"You ain't hear talk er no dead nigger nowhar dis mawnin', is you,
boss?" asked the old man earnestly.

"No," replied the policeman, reflectively. "No, I believe not. Have
you heard of any?"

"'Pears unter me dat I come mighty nigh gittin' some news bout
dat size, an' dat's w'at I'm a hunfin' fer. Bekaze ef dey er foun' a
stray nigger layin' 'roun' loose, wid 'is bref gone, den I wanter go
home an' git my brekfus' an' put on some clean doze, an' liver
myse'f up ter wunner deze yer jestesses er de peace, an git a fa'r
trial."

"Why, have you killed anybody?"

"Dat's w'at's I'm a 'quinn' inter now, but I wouldn't be sustonished
ef I ain't laid a nigger out some'rs on de subbubs. Hit's done got so
it's agin de law fer ter bus' loose an' kill a nigger, ain't it, boss?"

"Well, I should say so. You don't mean to tell me that you have
killed a colored man, do you?"

"I speck I is, boss. I speck I done gone an' done it dis time, sho.'
Hit's bin sorter growin' on me, an' it come ter a head dis mawnin',
les my name ain't Remus, an' dat's w'at dey bin er callin' me sence I
wuz ole er 'nuff fer ter scratch myse'f wid my lef' han'."

"Well, if you've killed a man, you'll have some fun, sure enough.
How was it?"

"Hit wuz dis way, boss: I wuz layin' in my bed dis mawnin' sorter
ruminatin' 'roun', when de fus news I know'd I year a fus' 'mong de
chickens, an' den my brissels riz. I done had lots er trubble wid
dem chickens, an' w'en I years wun un um squall my ve'y shoes
comes onfied. So I des sorter riz up an' retch fer my ole muskit,
and den I crope out er de back do', an' w'atter you reckin I seed?"

"I couldn't say."

"I seed de biggest, blackest nigger dat you ever laid eyes on. He
shined like de paint on 'im was fresh. He bed done grabbed fo'er
my forwardes' pullets. I crope up nigh do do', an' hollered an' axed
'im how he wnz a gittin' on, an' den he broke, an' ez he broke I
jammed de gun in de small er his back and banged aloose. He let a
yell like forty yaller cats a courtin', an' den he broke. You ain't seed
no nigger hump hisse'f like dat nigger. He tore down de well
shelter and fo, pannils er fence, an' de groun' look like wunner
deze yer harrycanes had lit dar and fanned up de yeath."

"Why, I thought you killed him?"

"He bleedzed ter be dead, boss. Ain't I put de gun right on 'im?
Seem like I feel 'im give way w'en she went off."

"Was the gun loaded?"

"Dat's w'at my ole 'oman say. She had de powder in dar, sho', but I
disremember wedder I put de buckshot in, er wedder I lef' urn out.
Leas'ways, I'm gwineter call on wunner deze yer jestesses. So long,
boss."

XIII HIS PRACTICAL VIEW OF THINGS

"BRER REMUS, is you heern tell er deze doin's out yer in de
udder eend er town?" asked a eolored deacon of the church the
other day.

"W'at doin's is dat, Brer Ab?"

"Deze yer signs an' wunders whar dat cullud lady died day 'fo'
yistiddy. Mighty quare goin's on out dar, Brer Remus, sho's you
bawn."

"Sperrits?" inquired Uncle Remus, sententiously. 

"Wuss'n dat, Brer Remus. Some say dat jedgmentday ain't fur off,
an' de folks is flockin' 'roun' de house a hollerin' an' a shoutin' des
like dey wuz in er revival. In de winder glass dar you kin see de
flags a flyin', an' Jacob's lather is dar, an' dar's writin' on de pane
w'at no man can't read-leas'wise dey ain't none read it yit."

"W'at kinder racket is dis youer givin' un me now, Brer Ab?"

"I done bin dar, Brer Remus; I done seed urn wid bofe my eyes.
Cullud lady what wuz intranced done woke up an' say dey ain't
much time fer ter tarry.

She say she meet er angel in de road, an' he p'inted straight fer de
mornin' star, an' tell her fer ter prepar'. Hit look mighty cu'us, Brer
Remus."

"Cum down ter dat, Brer Ab," said Uncle Remus, wiping his
spectacles carefully, and readjusting them-"cum down ter dat, an'
dey ain't nuthin' dat ain't cu'us. I ain't no spishus nigger myse'f, but
I 'spizes fer ter year dogs a howlin' an' squinch-owls havin' de ager
out in de woods, an' w'en a bull goes a bellerin' by de house den
my bones git cole an' my flesh cornmences fer ter creep; but w'en
it comes ter deze yer sines in de a'r an' deze yer sperrits in de
woods, den I'm out-den I'm done. I is, fer a fack. I bin livin' yer
more'n Seventy year, an' I year talk er niggers seein' ghos'es all
times er night an' all times er day, but I ain't never seed none yit;
an' deze yer flags an' Jacob's lathers, I ain't seed dem, nudder."

"Dey er dar, Brer Remus."

"Hit's des like I tell you, Brer Ab. I ain't 'sputin' 'bout it, but I ain't
seed um, an' I don't take no chances deze days on dat w'at I don't
see, an' dat w'at I sees I got ter 'zamine mighty close. Lemme tell
you dis, Brer Ab: don't you let deze sines onsettle you. W'en old
man Gabrile toot his ho'n, he ain't gwinter hang no sine out in de
winder-panes, an when ole Fadder Jacob lets down dat lather er
his'n you'll be mighty ap' fer ter hear de racket. An' don't you
bodder wid jedgment-day. Jedgment-day is lierbul fer ter take keer
un itse'f."

"Dat's so, Brer Remus."

"Hit's bleedzed ter be so, Brer Ab. Hit don't bodder me. Hit's done
got so now dat w'en I gotter pone er bread, an' a rasher er bacon,
an' nuff grease fer ter make gravy, I ain't keerin' much w'edder
fokes sees ghos'es er no.

XIV THAT DECEITFUL JUG

UNCLE REMUS was in good humor one evening recently when
he dropped casually into the editorial room of "The Constitution,"
as has been his custom for the past year or two. He had a bag slung
across his shoulder, and in the bag was a jug. The presence of this
humble but useful vessel in Uncle Remus's bag was made the
occasion for several suggestive jokes at his expense by the
members of the staff, but the old man's good humor was proof
against all insinuations.

"Dat ar jug's bin ter wab, mon. Hit's wunner deze yer ole timers. I
got dat jug down dar in Putmon County w'en Mars 'Lisha Ferryman
wuz a young man, an' now he's done growed up, an' got ole an'
died, an' his chilluns is growed up an' dey kin count dere
gran'chilluns, an' yit dar's dat jug des ez lively an' ez lierbul fer ter
kick up devilment ez w'at she wuz w'en she come fum de foundry."

"That's the trouble," said one of the young men. "That's the reason
we'd like to know what's in it now.

"Now youer gittin' on ma'shy groun'," replied Uncle Remus. "Dat's
de p'int. Dat's w'at make me say w'at I duz. I bin knowin' dat jug
now gwine on sixty-fl' year, an' de jug w'at's more seetful dan dat
jug ain't on de topside er de worrul. Dar she sets," continued the
old man, gazing at it reflectively, "dar she sets dez ez natchul ez er
ambertype, an' yit whar's de man w'at kin tell w'at kinder confab
she's a gwineter carry on w'en dat corn-cob is snatched outen 'er
mouf? Dat jug is mighty seefful, mon."

"Well, it don't deceive any of us up here," remarked the
agricultural editor, dryly. "We've seen jugs before."

"I boun' you is, boss; I boun' you is. But you ain't seed no seetful
jug like dat. Dar she sets a bellyin' out an' lookin' mighty fat an'
full, an' yit she'd set dar a bellyin' out ef dere wuzent nuthin' but
win' under dat stopper. You knows dat she ain't got no aigs in her,
ner no bacon, ner no grits, ncr no termartusses, ner no shellotes, an'
dat's 'bout all you duz know. Dog my cats ef de seetfulness er dat
jug don't git away wid me, coutmued Uncle Remus, with a
chuckle. "I wuz comm' 'cross de bridge des now, an' Brer John
Henry seed me wid de bag slung onter my back, an' de jug in it, an'
he ups an' sez, sezee:

Heyo, Brer Remus, ain't it gittin' late for watermillions?'

"Hit wuz de seeffulness er dat jug. If Brer John Henry know'd de
color er dat watermillion, I speck he'd snatch me up 'fo' de
confunce. I 'clar' ter grashus ef dat jug ain't a caution!"

"I suppose it's full of molasses now," remarked one of the young
men, sarcastically.

"Hear dat!" exclaimed Uncle Remus, triumphantly -'hear dat! W'at
I tell you? I sed dat jug wuz seetful, an' I sticks to it. I bin knowin'
dat-"

"What has it got in it?" broke in some one; "molasses, kerosene, or
train-oil?"

"Well, I lay she's loaded, boss. I ain't shuk her up sence I drapt in,
but I lay she's loaded."

"Yes," said the agricultural editor, "and it's the meanest bug-juice
in town-regular sorghum skimmings."

"Dat's needer yer ner dar," responded Uncle Remus. "Po' fokes
better be fixin' up for Chrismus now w'ile rashuns is cheap. Dat's
me. W'en I year Miss Sally gwine 'bout de house w'isslin' 'W'en I
k'n Read my Titles Cier'-an' w'en I see de martins swawmin' atter
sundown-an' w'en I year de peckerwoods confabbin' togedder dese
moonshiny nights in my een er town-en I knows de hot wedder's a
breakin' up, an' I know it's 'bout time fer po' fokes fer ter be rastlin'
'roun' and huntin' up dere rashuns. Dat's me, up an down."

"Well, we are satisfied. Better go and hire a hall," remarked the
sporting editor, with a yawn. "If you are engaged in a talking
match you have won the money. Blanket him somebody, and take
him to the stable."

"An' w'at's mo'," continued the old man, scorning to notice the
insinuation, "dough I year Miss Sally w'isslin', an' de peckerwoods
a chatterin', I ain't seein' none er deze yer loafin' niggers fixin' up
fer ter 'migrate. Dey kin holler Kansas all 'roun' de naberhood, but
ceppin' a man come 'long an' spell it wid greenbacks, he don't
ketch none er deze yer town niggers. You year me, dey ain't
gwine."

"Stand him up on the table," said the Sporting editor; "give him
room."

"Better go down yer ter de calaboose, an' git some news fer ter
print," said Uncle Remus, with a touch of irony in his tone. "Some
new nigger mighter broke inter jail."

"You say the darkeys are not going to emigrate this year?" inquired
the agricultural editor, who is interested in these things.

"Shoo! dat dey ain't! I done seed an' I knows."

"Well, how do you know?"

"How you tell w'en crow gwineter light? Niggers bin prom'nadin'
by my house all dis summer, holdin' dere heads high up an' de
w'ites er dere eyeballs shinin' in de sun. Dey wuz too bigitty fer ter
look over de gyardin' palm's. 'Long 'bout den de wedder wuz
fetchin' de nat'al sperrits er turkentime outen de pine-trees an' de
groun' wuz fa'rly smokin' wid de hotness. Now that it's gittin' sorter
airish in de mornin's, dey don't 'pear like de same niggers. Dey
done got so deyll look over in de yard, an' nex' news you know de'll
be tryin' fer ter scrape up 'quaintence wid de dog. W'en dey passes
now dey looks at de chicken-coop an' at der tater-patch. W'en you
see niggers gittin' dat familious, you kin 'pen' on dere campin' wid
you de ballunce er de season. Day 'fo' yistiddy I kotch one un um
lookin' over de fence at my shoats, an' I sez, sez I:

'Duz you wanter purchis dem hogs?'

"'Oh, no,' sezee, 'I wnz des lookin' at dere p'ints.'

"'Well, dey ain't p'intin' yo' way, sez I, 'an', fuddermo', ef you don't
bodder longer dem hogs dey ain't gwineter clime outer dat pen an'
'tack you, nudder,'" sez I.

"An' I boun'," continued Uncle Remus, driving the corn-cob
stopper a little tighter in his deceitful jug and gathering up his
bag-"an' I boun' dat my ole muskitil go off 'tween me an' dat same
nigger yit, an' he'll be at de bad een', an' dis seetful jugll 'fuse ter go
ter de funer'l."

XV THE FLORIDA WATERMELON

'LOOK; yer, boy," said Uncle Remus yesterday, Stopping near the
railroad crossing on Whitehall Street, and gazing ferociously at a
small colored youth; "look yer, boy, Ill lay you out flat ef you
come flingin' yo' watermillion rimes under my foot-you watch ef I
don't. You k'n play yo' pranks on deze yer w'ite fokes, but w'en you
come a cuttin' up yo' capers roun me youil Ian' right in de middle
uv er spell er sickness-now you mine w'at I tell you. An' I ain't
gwine fer ter put up wid none er yo' sassness nudder -let 'lone
flingin' watermillion rimes whar I kin git niixt up wid um. I done
had nuff watermillions yisfiddy an' de day befo'."

"How was that, Uncle Remus?" asked a gentleman standing near.

"Hit wuz sorter like dis, boss. Las' Chuseday, Mars John he fotch
home two er deze yer Flurridy watermillions, an him an' Miss Sally
sot down fer ter eat tim. Mars John an' Miss Sally ain't got nuthin'
dat's too good fer me, an' de fus news I know'd Miss Sally wuz a
hollerin' fer Remus. I done smelt de watermillion on de a'r, an' I
ain't got no better sense dan fer ter go w'en I years w'ite fokes a
hollerin'-I larnt dat w'en I wa'n't so high. Leas'ways I galloped up
ter de back po'ch, an' dar sot de watermillions dez ez natchul ez ef
dey'd er bin raised on de ole Spivey place in Putmon County. Den
Miss Sally, she cut me off er slishe-wunner deze yer ongodly
slishes, big ez yo' hat, an' I sot down on de Steps an' wrop myse'f
roun' de whole blessid chunk, 'cepin' de rime" Uncle Remus
paused and laid his hand upon his stomach as if feeling for
something.

"Well, old man, what then?"

"Dat's w'at I'm a gittin' at, boss," said Uncle Remus, smiling a
feeble smile. "I santered roun' 'bout er half nour, an den I begin fer
ter feel sorter squeemish-sorter like I done bin an, swoller'd 'bout
fo' poun's off'n de ruff een' uv er scantlin'. Look like ter me dat I
wuz gwineter be sick, an' den hit look like I wuzent. Bimeby a
little pain showed 'is head an' sorter m'andered roun' like he wuz a
lookin' fer a good place fer ter ketch holt, an' den a great big pain
jump up an' take atter de little one an' chase 'im 'roun' an' 'roun,' an'
he mus' er kotch 'im, kaze bimeby de big pain retch down an' grab
dis yer lef' leg-so-an' haul 'im up, an' den he retch down an grab de
udder one an' pull him up, an' den de wah begun, sho nuff. Fer
mighty nigh fo' hours dey kep' up dat racket, an' des ez soon ez a
little pain 'ud jump up de bigun 'ud light onter it an' gobble it up,
an' den de big tin 'ud go sailin' roun' huntin' fer mo'. some fokes is
mighty cu'us, dough. Nex' mornin' I hear Miss Sally a laughin', an'
singin' an' a w'isslin' des like dey want no watermillions raise in
Flurridy. But somebody better pen dis yer nigger boy up w'en I'm
on de town-I kin tell you dat."

XV UNCLE REMUS PREACHES TO A CONVERT

"DEY tells me you done jine de chu'ch," said Uncle Remus to
Pegleg Charley.

"Yes, sir," responded Charley, gravely, "dat's so."

"Well, I'm mighty glad er dat," remarked Uncle

Remus, with unction. "It's 'bout time dat I wuz spectin' fer ter hear
tin you in de chain-gang, an, stidder dat, hit's de chu'ch. Well, dey
ain't no tellin' deze days whar a nigger's gwineter lan'."

"Yes," responded Charley, straightening himself up and speaking
in a dignified tone, "yes, rm fixin' to do better. I'm preparin' fer to
shake worldliness. rm done quit so'shatin' wid deze w'ite town
boys.

Dey've been a goin' back on me too rapidly here lately, an' now I'm
a goin' back on dem."


"Well, ef you done had de speunce un it, I'm mighty glad. Ef you
got lijjun, you better hole on to it 'twell de las' day in de mornin'.
Hit's mighty good fer ter kyar' 'roun' wid you in de day time an'
likewise in de night time. Hit'll pay you mo' dan politics, an' ef you
stan's up like you oughter, hit'll las' longer dan a bone-fellum. But
you wanter have one er deze yer ole-time grips, an' you des gotter
shet yo' eyes an' swing on like wunner deze yer bull-tarrier dogs."

"Oh, I'm goin' to stick, Uncle Remus. You kin put your money on
dat. Deze town boys can't play no more tiv dere games on me. I'm
fixed. Can't you lend me a dime, Uncle Remus, to buy me a pie?
I'm dat hongry dat my stomach is gittin' ready to go in mo'nin.

Uncle Remus eyed Charley curiously a moment, while the latter
looked quietly at his timber toe. Finally, the old man sighed and
spoke:

"How long is you bin in de chu'ch, son?"

"Mighty near a week," replied Charley.

"Well, lemme tell you dis, now, 'fo' you go enny fudder. You ain't
bin in dar long nuff fer ter go 'roun' takin tip conterbutions. Wait
ontwell you gits Sorter seasoned like, an' dcn I'll hunt 'roun' in my
doze an' see ef I can't run out a thrip er two fer you. But don't you
levy taxes too early."

Charley laughed, and said he would let the old man off if he would
treat to a watermelon.

XVII AS TO EDUCATION

As Uncle Remus came up Whitehall Street recently, he met a little
colored boy carrying a slate and a number of books. Some words
passed between them, but their exact purport will probably never
be known. They were unpleasant, for the attention of a wandering
policeman was called to the matter by hearing the old man bawl
out:

"Don't you come foolin' longer me, nigger. Youer flippin' yo' sass
at de wrong color. You k'n go roun' yer an' sass deze w'ite people,
an' maybe dey'll stan' it, but w'en you come a slingin' yo' jaw at a
man w'at wuz gray w'en de fahmin' days gin out, you better go an'
git yo' hide greased."

"What's the matter, old man?" asked a sympathizing policeman.

"Nothin', boss, 'ceppin I ain't gwineter hav' no nigger chillun a
hoopin' an' a hollerin' at me w'en I'm gwine long de streets."

"0h, well, school-children-you know how they are.

"Dat's w'at make I say w'at I dtiz. Dey better be home pickin' tip
chips. W'at a nigger gwineter Yarn outen books? I kin take a ba4
stave an' fling mo' sense inter a nigger in one minnit dan all de
schoolhouses betwixt dis en de State er Midgigin. Don't talk,
honey! Wid one bar'l stave I kin fa'rly lif' de vail er ignunce."

"Then you don't believe in education?"

"Hit's de ruinashun er dis country. Look at my gal. De ole 'oman
sont 'er ter school las' year, an' now we dassent hardly ax 'er fer ter
kyar de washin' home.

She done got beyant 'er bizness. I ain't larut nuthin' in books, 'en yit
I kin count all de money I gits. No use talkin', boss. Put a
spellin'-book in a nigger's han's, en right den en dar' you loozes a
plow-hand. I done had de speunce un it."

XVIII A TEMPERANCE REFORMER

"Yer come Uncle Remus," said a well-dressed negro, who was
standing on the sidewalk near James's bank recently, talking to a
crowd of barbers. "Yer come Uncle Remus. I boun' he'll Sign it."

"You'll fling yo' money away ef you bet on it," responded Uncle
Remus. "I ain't turnin' nothin' loose on chu'ch 'scriptions. I wants
money right now fer ter git a pint er meal."

'Tain't dat."

"An' I ain't heppin fer ter berry nobody. Much's I kin do ter keep de
bref in my own body."

"'Tain't dat, nudder."

"An' I ain't puttin' my han' ter no reckommends. I'm fear'd
fer ter say a perlite wud 'bout myself, an' I des know I ain't gwine
'roun' flatfer'n up deze udder niggers."


"An' 'tain't dat," responded the darkey, who held a paper in his
hand. "We er gittin' up a Good Tempeler's lodge, an' we like ter git
yo' name."

"Eh-eh, honey! I done see too much er dis nigger tempunce. Dey
stan' up mighty squar' ontwell dere dues commence ter cramp um,
an' dey don't stan' de racket wuf a durn. No longer'n yistiddy I seed
one er de head men er one er dese Tempeler's s'cieties totin' water
fer a bar-room. He had de water in a bucket, but dey ain't no tellin'
how much red licker he wuz a totin'. G'long, chile-jine yo' s'ciety
an' be good ter yo'se'f. I'm a gittin' too ole. Gimme th'ee er fo'
drams endurin' er de day, an' I'm mighty nigh ez good a tempunce
man ez de next un. I got ter scuffle fer sump'n t'eat."

XIX AS A WEATHER PROPHET

UNCLE REMUS was enlightening a crowd of negroes at the
car-shed yesterday.

"Dar ain't nuthin'," said the old man, shaking his head pensively,
"dat ain't got no change wrote on it. Dar ain't nothin dat ain't
spotted befo' hit begins fer ter commence. We all speunces dat
p'overdence w'at lifts us up fum one place an' sets us down in de
udder. Hit's continerly a movin' an a movin.

"Dat's so!" "Youer talkin' now!" came from several of his hearers.

"I year Miss Sally readin' dis mawnin," continued the old man, "dat
a man wuz comin' down yer fer ter take keer er de wedder-wunner
deze yer Buro mens w'at goes 'roun' a puttin' up an' pullin' down."

"W'at he gwine do 'roun' yer?" asked one.

"He's a gwineter regelate de wedder," replied Uncle Remus,
sententiously. "He's a gwineter fix hit up so dat dere won't be so
much worriment 'mong de w'ite fokes 'bout de kinder wedder w'at
falls to dere lot."

"He gwine dish em up," suggested one of the older ones "like man
dish out sugar.

"No," answered Uncle Remus, mopping his benign features with a
very large and very red bandana. "He's a gwineter fix urn better'n
dat. He's a gwineter fix urn up so you kin have any kinder wedder
w'at you want widout totin' her home."

"How's dat?" asked some one.

"Hit's dis way," said the old man, thoughtfully. 'In co'se you knows
w'at kinder wedder you wants. Well, den, w'en de man comes long,
w'ich Miss Sally say he will, you des gotter go up dar, pick out yo'
wedder an' derell be a clock sot fer ter suit yo' case, an' w'en you
git home, derell be yo' wedder a settin' out in de yard waitin' fer
you. I wish he wuz yer now," the old man continued. 'Td take a p'ar
er frosts in mine, ef I kotched cold fer it. Dat's me!"

There were various exclamations of assent, and the old man went
on his way singing, "Don't you Grieve Atter Me."

XX THE OLD MAN'S TROUBLES

"WHAT makes you look so lonesome, Brer Remus?" asked a
well-dressed negro, as the old man came shuffling down the street
by James's corner yesterday.

"Youer mighty right, I'm lonesome, Brer John Henry. W'en a ole
nigger like me is gotter paddle de canoe an' do de fishin' at de
same time, an' w'en you bleedzd ter ketch de fish an' dassent turn
de paddle loose fer ter bait de hook, den I tell you, Brer John,
youer right whar de mink had de goslin'. Mars John and Miss
Sally, dey done bin gone down unto Putmon County fer ter see der
kinfolks mighty nigh fo' days, an' you better bleeve I done bin had
ter scratch 'roun' mighty lively fer ter make de rashuns run out
even.

"I wuz at yo' house las' night, Brer Remus," remarked Brer John
Henry, "but I couldn't roust you outer bed."

"Hit was de unseasonableness er de hour, I speck," said Uncle
Remus, dryly.

"'Pears unto me dat you all chu'ch deacons settin' up mighty late
deze cole nights. You'll be slippin' round arter hours some time er
nudder, an you'll slip bodaciously inter de calaboose. You mine
w'at I tell you.

"It's mighty cole wedder," said Brer John Henry, evidently wishing
to change the subject.

"Cole!" exclaimed Uncle Remus; "hit got pas' cole on der quarter
stretch. You oughter come to my house night 'fo' las'. Den you'd a
foun' me 'live an' kickin'."

"How's dat?"

"Well, I tell you, Brer John Henry, de cole wuz so cole, an' de
kiver wnz so light, dat I thunk I'd make a raid on Mars John's
shingle pile, an' out I goes an totes in a whole armful. Den I gits
under de kiver an' tells my ole 'oman fer ter lay 'em onto me like
she was roofin' a house. Bimeby she crawls in, an' de shingles w'at
she put on her side fer ter kiver wid, dey all drap off on de flo'.
Den up I gits an' piles 'em on agin, an' w'en I gits in bed my
shingles draps off, an' dat's de way it wuz de whole blessid night.
Fus' it wnz me up an' den de ole 'oman, an' it kep' us pow'ful warm,
too, dat kinder exercise. Oh, you oughter drapt roun' 'bout dat time,
Brer John Henry. You'd a year'd sho' nuff cussin'!"

"You don't tell me, Brer Remus!"

"My ole 'oman say de Ole Boy wouldn't a foun' a riper nigger, ef
he wer' ter scour de country fum Ferginny ter de AIabamt"

XXI THE FOURTH OF JULY

UNCLE REMUS made his appearance recently with his right arm
in a sling and his head bandaged to that extent that it looked like
the stick made to accompany the Centennial bass-drum. The old
man evidently expected an attack all around, for he was unusually
quiet, and fumbled in his pockets in an embarrassed manner. He
was not mistaken. The agricultural editor was the first to open fire:

"Well, you old villain! what have you been up to now?"

"It is really singular," remarked a commencement orator, "that not
even an ordinary holiday-a holiday, it seems to me, that ought to
arouse all the latent instincts of patriotism in the bosom of
American citizens-can occur without embroiling some of our most
valuable citizens. It is really singular to me that such a day should
be devoted by a certain class of our population to broils and
fisticuffs."

This final moral sentiment, which was altogether an impromptu
utterance, and which was delivered with the air of one who
addresses a vast but invisible audience of young ladies in white
dresses and blue sashes, seemed to add to the embarrassment of
Uncle Remus, and at the same time to make an explanation
necessary.

"Dey ain't none er you young w'ite men never had no 'casion fer ter
strike up wid one er deze Mobile niggers?" asked Uncle Remus.
'Kaze ef you iz, den you knows wharbouts de devilment come in.
Show me a Mobile nigger," continued the old man, an I'll show
you a nigger dat's marked for de chain-gang. Hit may be de fote er
de fif' er July, er hit may be de twelf' er Jinawerry, but w'en a
Mobile nigger gits in my naberhood right den an' dar trubble sails
in an' 'gages bode fer de season. I speck rm ez fon' er deze Nunited
States ez de nex' man w'at knows dat de Buro is busted up; but
long ez Remus kin stan' on his hine legs no Mobile nigger can't flip
inter dis town longer no Wes' P'int 'schushun an' boss 'roun' 'mong
de cullud fokes. Dat's me, up an' down, an' I bonn' dere's a nigger
some'rs on de road dis blessid day dat's got dis put away in his
'membunce."

"How did he happen to get you down and maul you in this startling
manner?" asked the commencement orator, with a tone of
exaggerated sympathy in his voice.

"Maul who?" exclaimed Uncle Remus, indignantly. "Maul who?
Boss, de nigger dat mauled me ain't bomded yit, an' dey er got ter
have anudder war 'fo one is bomded."

"Well, what was the trouble?"

"Hit wnz sorter dis way, boss. I wnz stannin' down dere by Mars
John Jeems's bank, chattin' wid Sis Tempy, w'ich I ain't seed 'er
befo' now gwine on seven year, an' watchin' de folks trompin' by,
w'en one er deze yer slick-lookin' niggers, wid a bee-gum hat an' a
brass watch ez big ez de head uv a beerbar'l, come long an' bresh
up agin me-so. Dere wuz two un um, an' dey went long gigglin' an'
laffin' like a nes'ful er yaller-hammers. Bimeby dey come long agin
an' de smart Ellick brush up by me once mo'. Den I say to myse'f, 'I
lay I fetch you ef you gimme anudder invite.' An', sho' 'nuff, yer he
come agin, an' dis time he rub a piece er watermillion rime under
my lef' year.

"What did you do?"

"Me? I'm a mighty long-sufferin' nigger, but he hadn't no mo'n
totch me 'fo' I flung dese yer bones in his face." Here Uncle Remus
held up his damaged hand triumphantly. "I sorter spramed my han',
boss, but dog my cats if I don't bleeve I spattered de nig ger's
eyeballs on de groun', and w'en he riz his count'nence look fresh
like beef-haslett. I look mighty spindlin' an' puny now, don't I,
boss?" inqufred the old man, with great apparent earnestness.

"Rather."

"Well, you des oughter see me git my Affikin up. Dey useter call
me er bad nigger long 'fo' de war, an hit looks like ter me dat I gits
wnss an' wnss. Brer John Henry say dat I oughter supdue my
rashfulness, an' I don't 'spute it, but tu'n a Mobile nigger loose in
dis town, fote er July or no fote er July, an', me er him, one is got
ter lan' in jail. Hit's proned inter me.





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Uncle Remus His Songs and His Sayings

