*The Project Gutenberg Etext of Through Russia, by Maxim Gorky*
#2 in our series by Maxim Gorky


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Through Russia

by Maxim Gorky

August, 2000  [Etext #2288]


*The Project Gutenberg Etext of Through Russia, by Maxim Gorky*
******This file should be named truss10.txt or truss10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, truss11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, truss10a.txt

E-text prepared by Martin Adamson - martin@grassmarket.freeserve.co.uk

Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.

We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

******

To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
author and by title, and includes information about how
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
for a more complete list of our various sites.

To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
at http://promo.net/pg).

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

Example FTP session:

ftp sunsite.unc.edu
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]

***

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





E-text prepared by Martin Adamson - martin@grassmarket.freeserve.co.uk





Translated by CJ Hogarth




CONTENTS

THE BIRTH OF A MAN
THE ICEBREAKER
GUBIN
NILUSHKA
THE CEMETERY
ON A RIVER STEAMER
A WOMAN
IN A MOUNTAIN DEFILE
KALININ
THE DEAD MAN




THE BIRTH OF A MAN

The year was the year '92-- the year of leanness--the scene a
spot between Sukhum and Otchenchiri, on the river Kodor, a spot
so near to the sea that amid the joyous babble of a sparkling
rivulet the ocean's deep-voiced thunder was plainly
distinguishable.

Also, the season being autumn, leaves of wild laurel were
glistening and gyrating on the white foam of the Kodor like a
quantity of mercurial salmon fry. And as I sat on some rocks
overlooking the river there occurred to me the thought that, as
likely as not, the cause of the gulls' and cormorants' fretful
cries where the surf lay moaning behind a belt of trees to the
right was that, like myself, they kept mistaking the leaves for
fish, and as often finding themselves disappointed.

Over my head hung chestnut trees decked with gold; at my feet
lay a mass of chestnut leaves which resembled the amputated
palms of human hands; on the opposite bank, where there waved,
tanglewise, the stripped branches of a hornbeam, an
orange-tinted woodpecker was darting to and fro, as though
caught in the mesh of foliage, and, in company with a troupe of
nimble titmice and blue tree-creepers (visitors from the
far-distant North), tapping the bark of the stem with a black
beak, and hunting for insects.

To the left, the tops of the mountains hung fringed with dense,
fleecy clouds of the kind which presages rain; and these clouds
were sending their shadows gliding over slopes green and
overgrown with boxwood and that peculiar species of hollow
beech-stump which once came near to effecting the downfall of
Pompey's host, through depriving his iron-built legions of the
use of their legs as they revelled in the intoxicating sweetness
of the " mead " or honey which wild bees make from the blossoms
of the laurel and the azalea, and travellers still
gather from those hollow stems to knead into lavashi or thin
cakes of millet flour.

On the present occasion I too (after suffering sundry stings
from infuriated bees) was thus engaged as I sat on the rocks
beneath the chestnuts. Dipping morsels of bread into a potful of
honey, I was munching them for breakfast, and enjoying, at the
same time, the indolent beams of the moribund autumn sun.

In the fall of the year the Caucasus resembles a gorgeous
cathedral built by great craftsmen (always great craftsmen are
great sinners) to conceal their past from the prying eyes of
conscience. Which cathedral is a sort of intangible edifice of
gold and turquoise and emerald, and has thrown over its hills
rare carpets silk-embroidered by Turcoman weavers of Shemi and
Samarkand, and contains, heaped everywhere, plunder brought from
all the quarters of the world for the delectation of the sun.
Yes, it is as though men sought to say to the Sun God: " All
things here are thine. They have been brought hither for thee by
thy people."

Yes, mentally I see long-bearded, grey-headed supermen, beings
possessed of the rounded eyes of happy children, descending from
the hills, and decking the earth, and sowing it with sheerly
kaleidoscopic treasures, and coating the tops of the mountains
with massive layers of silver, and the lower edges with a living
web of trees. Yes, I see those beings decorating and fashioning
the scene until, thanks to their labours, this gracious morsel
of the earth has become fair beyond all conception.

And what a privilege it is to be human! How much that is
wonderful leaps to the eye-how the presence of beauty causes.
the heart to throb with a voluptuous rapture that is almost pain!

And though there are occasions when life seems hard, and the
breast feels filled with fiery rancour, and melancholy dries and
renders athirst the heart's blood, this is not a mood sent us in
perpetuity. For at times even the sun may feel sad as he
contemplates men, and sees that, despite all that he has done
for them, they have done so little in return. . . .

No, it is not that good folk are lacking. It is that they need
to be rounded off--better still, to be made anew.

**********************

Suddenly there came into view over the bushes to my left a file
of dark heads, while through the surging of the waves and the
babble of the stream I caught the sound of human voices, a sound
emanating from a party of " famine people " or folk who were
journeying from Sukhum to Otchenchiri to obtain work on a local
road then in process of construction.

The owners of the voices I knew to be immigrants from the
province of Orlov. I knew them to be so for the reason that I
myself had lately been working in company with the male members
of the party, and had taken leave of them only yesterday in
order that I might set out earlier than they, and, after walking
through the night, greet the sun when he should arise above the
sea.

The members of the party comprised four men and a woman--the
latter a young female with high cheek-bones, a figure swollen
with manifest pregnancy, and a pair of greyish-blue eyes that
had fixed in them a stare of apprehension. At the present moment
her head and yellow scarf were just showing over the tops of the
bushes; and while I noted that now it was swaying from side to
side like a sunflower shaken by the wind, I recalled the fact
that she was a woman whose husband had been carried off at
Sukhum by a surfeit of fruit--this fact being known to me through
the circumstance that in the workmen's barraque where we had
shared quarters these folk had observed the good old Russian
custom of confiding to a stranger the whole of their troubles,
and had done so in tones of such amplitude and penetration that
the querulous words must have been audible for five versts
around.

And as I had talked to these forlorn people, these human beings
who lay crushed beneath the misfortune which had uprooted them
from their barren and exhausted lands, and blown them, like
autumn leaves, towards the Caucasus where nature's luxuriant,
but unfamiliar, aspect had blinded and bewildered them, and with
its onerous conditions of labour quenched their last spark of
courage; as I had talked to these poor people I had seen them
glancing about with dull, troubled, despondent eyes, and
heard them say to one another softly, and with pitiful smiles:

"What a country!"

"Aye,-- that it is !--a country to make one sweat!"

"As hard as a stone it is!"

"Aye, an evil country! "

After which they had gone on to speak of their native haunts,
where every handful of soil had represented to them the dust of
their ancestors, and every grain of that soil had been watered
with the sweat of their brows, and become charged with dear and
intimate recollections.

Previously there had joined the party a woman who, tall and
straight, had had breasts as flat as a board, and jawbones like
the jawbones of a horse, and a glance in her dull, sidelong
black eyes like a gleaming, smouldering fire.

And every evening this woman had been wont to step outside the
barraque with the woman in the yellow scarf and to seat herself
on a rubbish heap, and, resting her cheeks on the palms of her
hands, and inclining her head sideways, to sing in a high and
shrewish voice:

Behind the graveyard wall,
Where fair green bushes stand.
I'll spread me on the sand
A shroud as white as snow.
And not long will it be
Before my heart's adored,
My master and my lord,
Shall answer my curtsey low.

Usually her companion, the woman in the yellow scarf, had, with
head bent forward and eyes fixed upon her stomach, remained
silent; but on rare, unexpected occasions she had, in the
hoarse, sluggish voice of a peasant, sung a song with the
sobbing refrain:

Ah, my beloved, sweetheart of mine,
Never again will these eyes seek thine!

Nor amid the stifling blackness of the southern night had these
voices ever failed to bring back to my memory the snowy wastes
of the North, and the icy, wailing storm-wind, and the distant
howling of unseen wolves.

In time, the squint-eyed woman had been taken ill of a fever, and
removed to the town in a tilted ambulance; and as she had lain
quivering and moaning on the stretcher she had seemed still to
be singing her little ditty about the graveyard and the sand.

The head with the yellow scarf rose, dipped, and disappeared.

After I had finished my breakfast I thatched the honey-pot with
some leaves, fastened down the lid, and indolently resumed my
way in the wake of the party, my blackthorn staff tiptapping
against the hard tread of the track as I proceeded.

The track loomed-- a grey, narrow strip-- before me, while
on my right the restless, dark blue sea had the air of being
ceaselessly planed by thousands of invisible carpenters; so
regularly did the stress of a wind as moist and sweet and warm
as the breath of a healthy woman cause ever-rustling curls of
foam to drift towards the beach. Also, careening on to its port
quarter under a full set of bellying sails, a Turkish felucca was
gliding towards Sukhum; and, as it held on its course, it put me
in mind of a certain pompous engineer of the town who had
been wont to inflate his fat cheeks and say: " Be quiet, you,
or I will have you locked up! " This man had, for some reason
or another, an extraordinary weakness for causing arrests to
be made; and, exceedingly do I rejoice to think that by now the
worms of the graveyard must have consumed him down to the
very marrow of his bones. Would that certain other acquaintances
of mine were similarly receiving beneficent attention!

Walking proved an easy enough task, for I seemed to be borne on
air, while a chorus of pleasant thoughts, of many-coloured
recollections, kept singing gently in my breast--a chorus
resembling, indeed, the white-maned billows in the regularity
with which now it rose, and now it fell, to reveal in, as it
were, soft, peaceful depths the bright, supple hopes of youth,
like so many silver fish cradled in the bosom of the ocean.

Suddenly, as it trended seawards, the road executed a half-turn,
and skirted a strip of the sandy margin to which the waves kept
rolling in such haste. And in that spot even the bushes seemed
to have a mind to look the waves in the eyes--so strenuously did
they lean across the riband-like path, and nod in the direction
of the blue, watery waste, while from the hills a wind was
blowing that presaged rain.

***************************

But hark! From some point among the bushes a low moan arose--the
sound which never fails to thrill the soul and move it to
responsive quivers!

Thrusting aside the foliage, I beheld before me the woman in the
yellow scarf. Seated with her back resting against the stem of a
hazel-bush, she had her head sunken deeply between her
shoulders, her mouth hideously agape, her eyes staring vaguely
before her, her hands pressed to her swollen stomach, her breath
issuing with unnatural vehemence, and her abdomen convulsively,
spasmodically rising and falling. Meanwhile from her throat were
issuing moans which at times caused her yellow teeth to show
bare like those of a wolf.

"What is the matter?" I said as I bent over her. "Has anyone
assaulted you?"

The only result was that, shuffling bare feet in the sand like a
fly, she shook her nerveless hand, and gasped:

"Away, villain! Away with you!"

Then I understood what was the matter, for I had seen a similar
case before. Yet for the moment a certain feeling of shyness
made me edge away from her a little; and as I did so, she uttered
a prolonged moan, and her almost bursting eyeballs vented hot,
murky tears which trickled down her tense and livid features.

Thereupon I turned to her again, and, throwing down cooking-pot,
teapot, and wallet, laid her on her back, and strove to bend her
knees upwards in the direction of her body. Meanwhile she sought
to repel me with blows on face and breast, and at length rolled
on to her stomach. Then, raising herself on all fours, she,
sobbing, gasping, and cursing in a breath, crawled away like a
bear into a remoter portion of the thicket.

"Beast!" she panted. "Oh, you devil!"

Yet, even as the words escaped her lips, her arms gave way beneath
her, and she collapsed upon her face, with legs stretched out,
and her lips emitting a fresh series of convulsive moans.

Excited now to fever pitch, I hurriedly recalled my small store
of knowledge of such cases and finally decided to turn her on
her back, and, as before, to strive to bend her knees upwards in
the direction of her body. Already signs of imminent parturition
were not wanting.

"Lie still," I said, "and if you do that it will not be long
before you are delivered of the child."

Whereafter, running down to the sea, I pulled up my sleeves,
and, on returning, embarked upon my role, of accoucheur.

Scoring the earth with her fingers, uprooting tufts of withered
grass, and struggling to thrust them into her mouth, scattering
soil over her terrible, inhuman face and bloodshot eyes, the
woman writhed like a strip of birch bark in a wood fire. Indeed,
by this time a little head was coming into view, and it needed
all my efforts to quell the twitchings of her legs, to help the
child to issue, and to prevent its mother from thrusting grass
down her distorted, moaning throat. Meanwhile we cursed one
another-- she through her teeth, and I in an undertone; she, I
should surmise, out of pain and shame, and I, I feel certain,
out of nervousness, mingled with a perfect agony of compassion.

"O Lord!" she gasped with blue lips flecked with foam as her
eyes (suddenly bereft of their colour in the sunlight) shed
tears born of the intolerable anguish of the maternal function,
and her body writhed and twisted as though her frame had been
severed in the middle.

"Away, you brute!" was her oft-repeated cry as with her weak
hands, hands seemingly dislocated at the wrists, she strove to
thrust me to a distance. Yet all the time I kept saying
persuasively: "You fool! Bring forth as quickly as you can!"
and, as a matter of fact, was feeling so sorry for her that
tears continued to spurt from my eyes as much as from hers, and
my very heart contracted with pity. Also, never did I cease to
feel that I ought to keep saying something; wherefore, I
repeated, and again repeated: "Now then! Bring forth as quickly
as ever you can!"

And at last my hands did indeed hold a human creature in all its
pristine beauty. Nor could even the mist of tears prevent me
from seeing that that human creature was red in the face, and
that to judge from the manner in which it kept kicking and
resisting and uttering hoarse wails (while still bound to its
mother by the ligament), it was feeling dissatisfied in advance
with the world. Yes, blue-eyed, and with a nose absurdly sunken
between a pair of scarlet, rumpled cheeks and lips which
ceaselessly quivered and contracted, it kept bawling: "A-aah!
A-a-ah!"

Moreover, so slippery was it that, as I knelt and looked at it
and laughed with relief at the fact that it had arrived safely,
I came near to letting it fall upon the ground: wherefore I
entirely forgot what next I ought to have done.

"Cut it!" at length whispered the mother with eyes closed, and
features suddenly swollen and resembling those of a corpse.

"A knife!" again she whispered with her livid lips. "Cut it!"

My pocket-knife I had had stolen from me in the workmen's
barraque; but with my teeth I severed the caul, and then the
child gave renewed tongue in true Orlovian fashion, while the
mother smiled.  Also, in some curious fashion, the mother's
unfathomable eyes regained their colour, and became filled as
with blue fire as, plunging a hand into her bodice and feeling
for the pocket, she contrived to articulate with raw and
blood-flecked lips:

"I have not a single piece of string or riband to bind the caul
with."

Upon that I set to, and managed to produce a piece of riband,
and to fasten it in the required position.

Thereafter she smiled more brightly than ever. So radiantly did
she smile that my eyes came near to being blinded with the
spectacle.

"And now rearrange yourself," I said, "and in the meanwhile I
will go and wash the baby."

"Yes, yes," she murmured uneasily. "But be very careful with
him--be very gentle."

Yet it was little enough care that the rosy little homunculus
seemed to require, so strenuously did he clench his fists, and
bawl as though he were minded to challenge the whole world to
combat.

"Come, now!" at length I said. "You must have done, or your
very head will drop off."

Yet no sooner did he feel the touch of the ocean spray, and
begin to be sprinkled With its joyous caresses, than he lamented
more loudly and vigorously than ever, and so continued
throughout the process of being slapped on the back and breast
as, frowning and struggling, he vented squall after squall while
the waves laved his tiny limbs.

"Shout, young Orlovian!" said I encouragingly. "Let fly with
all the power of your lungs!"

And with that, I took him back to his mother. I found her with
eyes closed and lips drawn between her teeth as she writhed in
the torment of expelling the after-birth. But presently I
detected through the sighs and groans a whispered:

"Give him to me! Give him to me!"

"You had better wait a little," I urged.

"Oh no! Give him to me now!"

And with tremulous, unsteady hands she unhooked the bosom of her
bodice, and, freeing (with my assistance) the breast which
nature had prepared for at least a dozen children, applied the
mutinous young Orlovian to the nipple. As for him, he at once
understood the matter, and ceased to send forth further
lamentation.

"O pure and holy Mother of God!" she gasped in a long-drawn,
quivering sigh as she bent a dishevelled head over the little
one, and, between intervals of silence, fell to uttering soft,
abrupt exclamations. Then, opening her ineffably beautiful blue
eyes, the hallowed eyes of a mother, she raised them towards the
azure heavens, while in their depths there was coming and going
a flame of joy and gratitude. Lastly, lifting a languid hand,
she with a slow movement made the sign of the cross over both
herself and her babe.

"Thanks to thee O purest Mother of God!" she murmured.
"Thanks indeed to thee!"

Then her eyes grew dim and vague again, and after a pause
(during which she seemed to be scarcely breathing) she said in a
hard and matter-of-fact tone:

"Young fellow, unfasten my satchel."

And whilst I was so engaged she continued to regard me with a
steady gaze; but, when the task was completed she smiled
shamefacedly, and on her sunken cheeks and sweat-flecked temples
there dawned the ghost of a blush.

"Now," said she, "do you, for the present, go away."

"And if I do so, see that in the meanwhile you do not move
about too much."

"No, I will not. But please go away."

So I withdrew a little. In my breast a sort of weariness was
lurking, but also in my breast there was echoing a soft and
glorious chorus of birds, a chorus so exquisitely in accord with
the never-ceasing splash of the sea that for ever could I have
listened to it, and to the neighbouring brook as it purled on
its way like a maiden engaged in relating confidences about her
lover.

Presently, the woman's yellow-scarfed head (the scarf now tidily
rearranged) reappeared over the bushes.

"Come, come, good woman!" was my exclamation. "I tell you
that you must not move about so soon."

And certainly her attitude now was one of utter languor, and she
had perforce to grasp the stem of a bush with one hand to
support herself. Yet while the blood was gone from her face,
there had formed in the hollows where her eyes had been two
lakes of blue.

"See how he is sleeping!" she murmured.

And, true enough, the child was sound asleep, though to my eyes
he looked much as any other baby might have done, save that the
couch of autumn leaves on which he was ensconced consisted of
leaves of a kind which could not have been discovered in the
faraway forests of Orlov.

"Now, do you yourself lie down awhile," was my advice.

"Oh, no," she replied with a shake of her head on its sinuous
neck; "for I must be collecting my things before I move on
towards--"

"Towards Otchenchiri"

"Yes. By now my folk will have gone many a verst in that
direction."

"And can you walk so far? "

"The Holy Mother will help me."

Yes, she was to journey in the company of the Mother of God. So
no more on the point required to be said.

Glancing again at the tiny, inchoate face under the bushes, her
eyes diffused rays of warm and kindly light as, licking her
lips, she, with a slow movement, smoothed the breast of the
little one.

Then I arranged sticks for a fire, and also adjusted stones to
support the kettle.

"Soon I will have tea ready for you," I remarked.

"And thankful indeed I shall be," she responded, "for my breasts
are dried up."

"Why have your companions deserted you?" I said next.

"They have not deserted me. It was I that left them of my own
accord. How could I have exposed myself in their presence?"

And with a glance at me she raised a hand to her face as,
spitting a gout of blood, she smiled a sort of bashful smile.

"This is your first child, I take it?"

"It is. . . . And who are you?"

"A man."

"Yes, a man, of course; but, are you a MARRIED man? "

"No, I have never been able to marry."

"That cannot be true."

"Why not?"

With lowered eyes she sat awhile in thought.

"Because, if so, how do you come to know so much about women's
affairs?"

This time I DID lie, for I replied:

"Because they have been my study. In fact, I am a medical
student."

"Ah! Our priest's son also was a student, but a student for the
Church."

"Very well. Then you know what I am. Now I will go and fetch
some water."

Upon this she inclined her head towards her little son and
listened for a moment to his breathing. Then she said with a
glance towards the sea:

"I too should like to have a wash, but I do not know what the
water is like. What is it? Brackish or salt?"

"No; quite good water--fit for you to wash in."

"Is it really?"

"Yes, really. Moreover, it is warmer than the water of the
streams hereabouts, which is as cold as ice."

"Ah! Well, you know best."

Here a shaggy-eared pony, all skin and bone, was seen
approaching us at a foot's pace. Trembling, and drooping its
head, it scanned us, as it drew level, with a round black eye,
and snorted. Upon that, its rider pushed back a ragged fur cap,
glanced warily in our direction, and again sank his head.

"The folk of these parts are ugly to look at," softly commented
the woman from Orlov.

Then I departed in quest of water. After I had washed my face
and hands I filled the kettle from a stream bright and lively as
quicksilver (a stream presenting, as the autumn leaves tossed in
the eddies which went leaping and singing over the stones, a
truly enchanting spectacle), and, returning, and peeping through
the bushes, perceived the woman to be crawling on hands and
knees over the stones, and anxiously peering about, as though in
search of something.

"What is it? " I inquired, and thereupon, turning grey in the
face with confusion she hastened to conceal some article under
her person, although I had already guessed the nature of the
article.

"Give it to me," was my only remark. "I will go and bury it."

"How so? For, as a matter of fact, it ought to be buried under
the floor in front of some stove."

"Are we to build a stove HERE?  Build it in five minutes?" I
retorted.

"Ah, I was jesting. But really, I would rather not have it
buried here, lest some wild beast should come and devour it. . .
Yet it ought to be committed only to the earth."

That said, she, with averted eyes, handed me a moist and heavy
bundle; and as she did so she said under her breath, with an air
of confusion:

"I beg of you for Christ's sake to bury it as well, as deeply,
as you can. Out of pity for my son do as I bid you."

I did as she had requested; and, just as the task had been
completed, I perceived her returning from the margin of the sea
with unsteady gait, and an arm stretched out before her, and a
petticoat soaked to the middle with the sea water. Yet all her
face was alight with inward fire, and as I helped her to regain
the spot where I had prepared some sticks I could not help
reflecting with some astonishment:

"How strong indeed she is!"

Next, as we drank a mixture of tea and honey, she inquired:

"Have you now ceased to be a student?"

"Yes."

"And why so? Through too much drink? "

"Even so, good mother."

"Dear me! Well, your face is familiar to me. Yes, I remember
that I noticed you in Sukhum when once you were arguing with the
barraque superintendent over the question of rations. As I did
so the thought occurred to me: 'Surely that bold young fellow
must have gone and spent his means on drink? Yes, that is how it
must be.'"

Then, as from her swollen lips she licked a drop of honey, she
again bent her blue eyes in the direction of the bush under
which the slumbering, newly-arrived Orlovian was couched.

"How will he live?" thoughtfully she said with a sigh--then
added:

"You have helped me, and I thank you. Yes, my thanks are yours,
though I cannot tell whether or not your assistance will have
helped HIM."

And, drinking the rest of her tea, she ate a morsel of bread,
then made the sign of the cross. And subsequently, as I was
putting up my things, she continued to rock herself to and fro,
to give little starts and cries, and to gaze thoughtfully at
the ground with eyes which had now regained their original
colour. At last she rose to her feet.

"You are not going yet? " I queried protestingly.

"Yes, I must."

"But--"

"The Blessed Virgin will go with me. So please hand me over the
child."

"No, I will carry him."

And, after a contest for the honour, she yielded, and we walked
away side by side.

"I only wish I were a little steadier on my feet," she remarked
with an apologetic smile as she laid a hand upon my shoulder,

Meanwhile, the new citizen of Russia, the little human being of an
unknown future, was snoring soundly in my arms as the sea
plashed and murmured, and threw off its white shavings, and the
bushes whispered together, and the sun (now arrived at the
meridian) shone brightly upon us all.

In calm content it was that we walked; save that now and then
the mother would halt, draw a deep breath, raise her head, scan
the sea and the forest and the hills, and peer into her son's
face. And as she did so, even the mist begotten of tears of
suffering could not dim the wonderful brilliancy and clearness
of her eyes. For with the sombre fire of inexhaustible love were
those eyes aflame.

Once, as she halted, she exclaimed:

"0 God, 0 Mother of God, how good it all is! Would that for
ever I could walk thus, yes, walk and walk unto the very end of
the world! All that I should need would be that thou, my son, my
darling son, shouldst, borne upon thy mother's breast, grow and
wax strong!"

And the sea murmured and murmured.



THE ICEBREAKER

On a frozen river near a certain Russian town, a gang of seven
carpenters were hastily repairing an icebreaker which the
townsfolk had stripped for firewood.

That year spring happened to be late in arriving, and youthful
March looked more like October, and only at noon, and that not
on every day, did the pale, wintry sun show himself in the
overcast heavens, or, glimmering in blue spaces between clouds,
contemplate the earth with a squinting, malevolent eye.

The day in question was the Friday in Holy Week, and, as night
drew on, drippings were becoming congealed into icicles half an
arshin long, and in the snow-stripped ice of the river only the
dun hue of the wintry clouds was reflected.

As the carpenters worked there kept mournfully, insistently
echoing from the town the coppery note of bells; and at
intervals heads would raise themselves, and blue eyes would gleam
thoughtfully through the same grey fog in which the town lay
enveloped, and an axe uplifted would hover a moment in the air
as though fearing with its descent to cleave the luscious flood
of sound.

Scattered over the spacious river-track were dark pine branches,
projecting obliquely from the ice, to mark paths, open spaces,
and cracks on the surface; and where they reared themselves
aloft, these branches looked like the cramped, distorted arms of
drowning men.

From the river came a whiff of gloom and depression. Covered
over with sodden slush, it stretched with irksome rigidity
towards the misty quarter whence blew a languid, sluggish, damp,
cold wind.

Suddenly the foreman, one Ossip, a cleanly built, upright
little peasant with a neatly curling, silvery beard, ruddy
cheeks, and a flexible neck, a man everywhere and always in
evidence, shouted:

"Look alive there, my hearties!"

Presently he turned his attention to myself, and smiled
insinuatingly.

"Inspector," he said, "what are you trying to poke out of
the sky with that squat nose of yours? And why are you here at
all? You come from the contractor, you say? -- from Vasili
Sergeitch? Well, well! Then your job is to hurry us up, to keep
barking out,' Mind what you are doing, such-and-such gang! ' Yet
there you stand-blinking over your task like an object dried
stiff! It's not to blink that you're here, but to play the
watchdog upon us, and to keep an eye open, and your tongue on
the wag. So issue your commands, young cockerel."

Then he shouted to the workmen:

"Now, then! No shirking!  Is the job going to be finished
tonight, or is it not? "

As a matter of fact, he himself was the worst shirker in the
artel [Workman's union].  True, he was also a first-rate hand at
his trade, and a man who could work quickly and well and with
skill and concentration; but, unfortunately, he hated putting
himself out, and preferred to spend his time spinning
arresting yarns. For instance, on the present occasion he chose
the moment when work was proceeding with a swing, when everyone
was busily and silently and wholeheartedly labouring with the
object of running the job through to the end, to begin in his
musical voice:

"Look here, lads. Once upon a time--"

And though for the first two or three minutes the men appeared
not to hear him, and continued their planing and chopping as
before, the moment came when the soft tenor accents caught and
held the men's attention, as they trickled and burbled forth.
Then, screwing up his bright eyes with a humorous air, and
twisting his curly beard between his fingers, Ossip gave a
complacent click of his tongue, and continued measuredly, and
with deliberation:

"So he seized hold of the tench, and thrust it back into the
cave. And as he turned to proceed through the forest he thought
to himself: 'Now I must keep my eyes about me.' And suddenly,
from somewhere (no one could have said where), a woman's voice
shrieked: 'Elesi-a-ah! Elesia-ah!'"

Here a tall, lanky Morduine named Leuka, with, as surname,
Narodetz, a young fellow whose small eyes wore always an
expression of astonishment, laid aside his axe, and stood gaping.

"And from the cave a deep bass voice replied: 'Elesi-a-ah!'
while at the same moment the tench sprang from the cave, and,
champing its jaws, wriggled and wriggled back to the slough."

Here an old soldier named Saniavin, a morose man, a tippler,
and a sufferer from asthma and an inexplicable grudge against
life in general, croaked out:

"How could your tench have wriggled across dry land if it was a
fish?"

"Can, for that matter, a fish speak?" was Ossip's
good-humoured retort.

All of which inspired Mokei Budirin, a grey-headed muzhik of a
cast of countenance canine in the prominence of his jaws and the
recession of his forehead, and taciturn withal, though not
otherwise remarkable, to give slow, nasal utterance to his
favourite formula.

"That is true enough," he said.

For never could anything be spoken of that was grim or
marvellous or lewd or malicious, but Budirin at once re-echoed
softly, but in a tone of unshakable conviction: "That is true
enough."

Thereafter he would tap me on the breast with his hard and
ponderous fist.

Presently work again underwent an interruption through the fact
that Yakov Boev, a man who possessed both a stammer and a
squint, became similarly filled with a desire to tell us
something about a fish. Yet from the moment that he began his
narrative everyone declined to believe it, and laughed at his
broken verbiage as, frequently invoking the Deity, and cursing,
and brandishing his awl, and viciously swallowing spittle, he
shouted amid general ridicule:

"Once-once upon a time there lived a man. Yes, other folk
before YOU have believed my tale. Indeed, it is no more than the
truth that I'm going to tell you. Very well! Cackle away, and be
damned!"

Here everyone without exception dropped his work to shout with
merriment and clap his hands: with the result that, doffing his
cap, and thereby disclosing a silvered, symmetrically shaped
head with one bald spot amid its one dark portion, Ossip was
forced to shout severely:

"Hi, you Budirin! You've had your say, and given us some fun,
and there must be no more of it."

"But I had only just begun what I want to say," the old soldier
grumbled, spitting upon the palms of his hands.

Next, Ossip turned to myself.

"Inspector," he began . . .

It is my opinion that in thus hindering the men from work
through his tale-telling, Ossip had some definite end in view. I
could not say precisely what that end was, but it must have been
the object either of cloaking his own laziness or of giving the
men a rest. On the other hand, whenever the contractor was
present he, Ossip, bore himself with humble obsequiousness , and
continued to assume a guise of simplicity which none the less
did not prevent him, on the advent of each Saturday, from
inducing his employer to bestow a pourboire upon the artel.

And though this same Ossip was an artelui, and a director of the
artel, his senior co-members bore him no affection, but, rather,
looked upon him as a wag or trifler, and treated him as of no
importance. And, similarly, the younger members of the artel
liked well enough to listen to his tales, but declined to take
him seriously, and, in some cases, regarded him with
ill-concealed, or openly expressed, distrust.

Once the Morduine, a man of education with whom, on occasions, I
held discussions on intimate subjects, replied to a question of
mine on the subject of Ossip:

"I scarcely know. Goodness alone knows! No, I do not know
anything about him."

To which, after a pause, he added:

"Once a fellow named Mikhailo, a clever fellow who is now dead,
insulted Ossip by saying to him: 'Do you call yourself a man?
Why, regarded as a workman, you're as lifeless as a doornail,
while, seeing that you weren't born to be a master, you'll all
your life continue chattering in corners, like a plummet
swinging at the end of a string!' Yes, and that was true enough."

Lastly. after another pause the Morduine concluded:

"No matter. He is not such a bad sort."

My own position among these men was a position of some
awkwardness, for, a young fellow of only fifteen, I had been
appointed by the contractor, a distant relative of mine, to the
task of superintending the expenditure of material. That is to
say, I had to see to it that the carpenters did not make away
with nails, or dispose of planks in return for drink. Yet all
the time my presence was practically useless, seeing that the
men stole nails as though I were not even in existence and
strove to show me that among them I was a person too many, a
sheer incubus, and seized every opportunity of giving me covert
jogs with a beam, and similarly affronting me.

This, of course, made my relations with them highly difficult,
embarrassing, and irksome; and though moments occurred when I
longed to say something that might ingratiate me, and
endeavoured to effect an advance in that direction, the words
always failed me at the necessary juncture, and I found myself
lying crushed as before under a burdensome sense of the
superfluity of my existence.

Again, if ever I tried to make an entry as to some material
which had been used, Ossip would approach me, and, for instance,
say:

"Is it jotted down, eh? Then let me look at it."

And, eyeing the notebook with a frown, he would add vaguely:

"What a nice hand you write!" (He himself could write only in
printing fashion, in the large scriptory characters of the
Ecclesiastical Rubric, not in those of the ordinary kind.)

"For example, that scoop there--what does IT say?"

"It is the word 'Good.'"

"'Good'? But what a slip-knot of a thing! And what are those
words THERE, on THAT line?"

"They say, 'Planks, 1 vershok by 9 arshini, 5.'"

"No, six was the number used."

"No, five."

"Five? Why, the soldier broke one, didn't he?"

"Yes, but never mind--at least it wasn't a plank that was
wanted."

"Oh! Well, I may tell you that he took the two pieces to the
tavern to get drink with."

Then, glancing into my face with his cornflower-blue eyes and
quiet, quizzical smile, he would say without the least confusion
as he twisted the ringlets of his beard:

"Put down '6.' And see here, young cockerel. The weather has
turned wet and cold, and the work is hard, and sometimes folk
need to have their spirits cheered and raised with a drop of
liquor. So don't you be too hard upon us, for God won't think
the more of you for being strict."

And as he thus talked to me in his slow and kindly, but
semi-affected, fashion--bespattering me, as it were, with wordy
sawdust--I would suddenly grow blind of an eye and silently show
him the corrected figure.

"That's it--that's right. And how fine the figure looks now, as
it squats there like a merchant's buxom, comely dame!"

Then he would be seen triumphantly telling his mates of his
success; then, I would find myself feeling acutely conscious of
the fact that everyone was despising me for my complacence Yes,
grown sick beyond endurance with a yearning for some thing which
it could not descry, my fifteen-year-old heart would dissolve in
a flood of mortified tears, and there would pass through my
brain the despondent, aching thought:

"Oh, what a sad, uncomfortable world is this! How should Ossip
have known so well that I should not re-correct the 6 into a 5,
or that I should not tell the contractor that the men have
bartered a plank for liquor?"

Again, there befell an occasion when the men stole two pounds'
weight of five vershok mandrels and bolts.

"Look here," I said to Ossip warningly. "I am going to report
this."

"All right," he agreed with a twitch of his grey eyebrows.
"Though what such a trifle can matter I fail to see. Yes, go
and report every mother's son of them."

And to the men themselves he shouted:

"Hi, boobies! Each of you now stands docked for some mandrels
and bolts."

"Why?" was the old soldier's grim inquiry.

"Because you DO so stand," carelessly retorted the other.

With snarls thereafter, the men eyed me covertly, until I began
to feel that very likely I should not do as I had threatened,
and even that so to do might not be expedient.

"But look here," said I to Ossip. "I am going to give the
contractor notice, and let all of you go to the devil. For if I
were to remain with you much longer I too should become a thief."

Ossip stroked his beard awhile, and pondered. Then he seated
himself beside me, and said in an undertone:

"That is true."

"Well?"

"But things are always so. The truth is that it's time you
departed. What sort of a watchman, of a checker, are you? In
jobs of this kind what a man needs to know is the meaning of
property. He needs to have in him the spirit of a dog, so that
he shall look after his master's stuff as he would look after
the skin which his mother has put on to his own body. But you,
you young puppy, haven't the slightest notion of what property
means. In fact, were anyone to go and tell Vasili Sergeitch
about the way in which you keep letting us off, he'd give it you
in the neck. Yes, you're no good to him at all, but just an
expense: whereas when a man serves a master he ought, do you
understand, to be PROFITABLE to that master."

He rolled and handed me a cigarette.

"Smoke this," said he, "and perhaps it'll make your brain work
easier. If only you had been of a less awkward, uncomfortable
nature, I should have said to you, 'Go and join the priests;
but, as things are, you aren't the right sort for that--you're
too stiff and unbending, and would never make headway even with
an abbot. No, you're not the sort to play cards with. A monk is
like a jackdaw--he chatters without knowing what he is chattering
about, and pays no heed to the root of things, so busy is he
with stuffing himself full with the grain. I say this to you
with absolute earnestness, for I perceive you to be strange to
our ways--a cuckoo that has blundered into the wrong nest."

And, doffing his cap, a gesture which he never failed to execute
when he had something particularly important to say, he added
humbly and sonorously as he glanced at the grey firmament:

"In the sight of the Lord our ways are the ways of thieves, and
such as will never gain of Him salvation."

"And that is true enough," responded Mokei Budirin after the
fashion of a clarionet.

From that time forth, Ossip of the curly, silvered head, bright
eyes, and shadowy soul became an object of agreeable interest
for me. Indeed, there grew up between us a species of
friendship, even though I could see that a civil bearing towards
me in public was a thing that it hurt him to maintain. At all
events, in the presence of others he avoided my glance, and his
eyes, clear, unsullied, and fight blue in tint, wavered
unsteadily, and his lips twitched and assumed an artificially
unpleasant expression, while he uttered some such speech as:

"Hi, you Makarei, see that you keep your eyes open, and cam
your pay, or that pig of a soldier will be making away with more
nails!"

But at other times, when we were alone together, he would speak
to me kindly and instructively, while his eyes would dance and
gleam with a faint, grave, knowing smile, and dart blue rays
direct into mine, while for my part, as I listened to his words,
I took every one of them to be absolutely true and balanced,
despite their strange delivery.

"A man's duty consists in being good," I remarked on one
occasion.

"Yes, of course," assented Ossip, though the next moment he
veiled his eyes with a smile, and added in an undertone:
"But what do you understand by the term 'good'? In my opinion,
unless virtue be to their advantage, folk spit upon that
'goodness,' that 'honourableness,' of yours. Hence, the better
plan is to pay folk court, and be civil to them, and flatter and
cajole every mother's son of them. Yes, do that, and your
'goodness' will have a chance of bringing you in some return. Not
that I do not say that to be 'good,' to be able to look your
own ugly jowl in the face in a mirror, is pleasant enough; but,
as I see the matter, it is all one to other people whether you
be a cardsharper or a priest so long as you're polite, and let
down your neighbours lightly. That's what they want."

For my part I never, at that period, grew weary of watching my
fellows, for it was my constant idea that some day one of them
would be able to raise me to a higher level, and to bring me to
an understanding of this unintelligible and complicated
existence of ours. Hence I kept asking myself the restless, the
importunate question:

"What precisely is the human soul?

Certain souls, I thought, existed which seemed like balls of
copper, for, solid and immovable, they reflected things from
their own point of view alone, in a dull and irregular and
distorted fashion. And souls, I thought, existed which seemed as
flat as mirrors, and, for all intents and purposes, had no
existence at all.

And in every case the human soul seemed formless, like a cloud,
and as murkily mutable as an imitation opal, a thing which
altered according to the colour of what adjoined it.

Only as regarded the soul of the intelligent Ossip was I
absolutely at a loss, absolutely unable to reach a conclusion.

Pondering these and similar matters in my mind, I, on the day of
which I speak, stood gazing at the river, and at the town under
the hill, as I listened to the bells. Rearing themselves aloft
like the organ pipes in my favourite Polish-Roman Catholic
church, the steeples of the town had their crosses dimly
sparkling as though the latter had been stars imprisoned in a
murky sky. Yet it was as though those stars hoped eventually to
ascend into the purer firmament above the wind-torn clouds that
they sparkled; and as I stood watching the clouds glide onward,
and momentarily efface with their shadows, the town's
multifarious hues, I marked the fact that although, whenever
dark-blue cavities in their substance permitted the beams of the
sun to illuminate the buildings below, those buildings' roofs
assumed tints of increased cheerfulness. The clouds seemed to
glide the faster to veil the beams, while the humid shadows grew
more opaque-- and the scene darkened as though only for a moment
had it assumed a semblance of joy.

The buildings of the town (looking like heaps of muddy snow),
the black, naked earth around those buildings, the trees in the
gardens, the hummocks of piled-up soil, the dull grey glimmer of
the window panes of the houses--all these things reminded me of
winter, even though the misty breath of the northern spring was
beginning to steal over the whole.

Presently a young fellow with flaxen hair, a pendent underlip,
and a tall, ungainly figure, by name Mishuk Diatlov, essayed to
troll the stanza:

"That morn to him the maiden came,
To find his soul had fled."

Whereupon the old soldier shouted:

"Hi, you! Have you forgotten the day?"

And even Boev saw fit to take umbrage at the singing, and,
threatening Diatlov with his fist, to rap out:

"Ah, sobatchnia dusha!" ["Soul of a dog."]

"What a rude, rough, primitive lot we Russians are!" commented
Ossip, seating himself atop of the icebreaker, and screwing up
his eyes to measure its fall. "To speak plainly, we Russians
are sheer barbarians. Once upon a time, I may tell you, an
anchorite happened to be on his travels; and as the people came
pressing around him, and kneeling to him, and tearfully
beseeching him with the words, '0h holy father, intercede for us
with the wolves which are devouring our substance!' he replied:
'Ha! Are you, or are you not, Orthodox Christians? See that I
assign you not to condign perdition!' Yes, angry, in very truth
he was. Nay, he even spat in the people's faces. Yet in reality
he was a kindly old man, for his eyes kept shedding tears
equally with theirs."

Twenty sazheni below the icebreaker was a gang of barefooted
sailors, engaged in hacking out the floes from under their
barges; and as they shattered the brittle, greyish-blue crust on
the river, the mattocks rang out, and the sharp blades of the
icecutters gleamed as they thrust the broken fragments under the
surface. Meanwhile, there could be heard a bubbling of water, and
the sound of rivulets trickling down to the sandy margin of the
river. And similarly among our own gang was there audible a
scraping of planes, and a screeching of saws, and a clattering
of iron braces as they were driven into the smooth yellow wood,
while through all the web of these sounds there ran the
ceaseless song of the bells, a song so softened by distance as
to thrill the soul, much as though dingy, burdensome labour were
holding revel in honour of spring, and calling upon the latter
to spread itself over the starved, naked surface of the
gradually thawing ground.

At this point someone shouted hoarsely:

"Go and fetch the German. We have not got hands enough."

And from the bank someone bawled in reply:

"Where IS he?"

"In the tavern. That is where you must go and look for him."

And as they made themselves heard, the voices floated up
turgidly into the sodden air, spread themselves over the river's
mournful void, and died away,

Meanwhile our men worked with industry and speed, but not
without a fault or two, for their thoughts were fixed upon the
town and its washhouses and churches. And particularly restless
was Sashok Diatlov, a man whose hair, as flaxen as that of his
brother, seemed to have been boiled in lye. At intervals,
glancing up-river, this well-built, sturdy young fellow would
say softly to his brother:

"It's cracking now, eh?"

And, certainly, the ice had "moved" two nights ago, so that
since yesterday morning the river watchmen had refused to permit
horsed vehicles to cross, and only a few beadlike pedestrians
now were making their way along the marked-out ice paths, while,
as they proceeded, one could hear the water slapping against the
planks as the latter bent under the travellers' weight.

"Yes, it IS cracking," at length Mishuk replied with a hoist
of his ginger eyebrows.

Ossip too scanned the river from under his hand. Then he said to
Mishuk:

"Pah! It is the dry squeak of the planes in your own hand that
you keep hearing, so go on with your work, you son of a beldame.
And as for you, Inspector, do you help me to speed up the men
instead of burying your nose in your notebook."

By this time there remained only two more hours for work, and
the arch of the icebreaker had been wholly sheathed in
butter-tinted scantlings, and nothing required to be added to it
save the great iron braces. Unfortunately, Boev and Saniavin,
the men who had been engaged upon the task of cutting out the
sockets for the braces, had worked so amiss, and run their lines
so straight, that, when it came to the point, the arms of the
braces refused to sink properly into the wood.

"Oh, you cock-eyed fool of a Morduine!" shouted Ossip, smiting
his fist against the side of his cap. "Do you call THAT sort of
thing work?"

At this juncture there came from somewhere on the bank a
seemingly exultant shout of:

"Ah! NOW it's giving way!"

And almost at the same moment, there stole over the river a sort
of rustle, a sort of quiet crunching which made the projecting
pine branches quiver as though they were trying to catch at
something, while, shouldering their mattocks, the barefooted
sailors noisily hastened aboard their barges with the aid of
rope ladders.

And then curious indeed was it to see how many people suddenly
came into view on the river--to see how they appeared to issue
from below the very ice itself, and, hurrying to and fro like
jackdaws startled by the shot of a gun, to dart hither and
thither, and to seize up planks and boathooks, and to throw them
down again, and once more to seize them up.

"Put the tools together," Ossip shouted. "And look alive
there, and make for the bank."

"Aye, and a fine Easter Day it will be for us on THAT bank!"
growled Sashok.

Meanwhile, it was the river rather than the town that seemed to
be motionless--the latter had begun, as it were, to quiver and
reel, and, with the hill above it, to appear to be gliding
slowly up stream, even as the grey, sandy bank some ten sazheni
from us was beginning to grow tremulous, and to recede.

"Run, all of you!" shouted Ossip, giving me a violent push as
he did so. Then to myself in particular he added: "Why stand
gaping there?"

This caused a keen sense of danger to strike home in my heart,
and to make my feet feel as though already the ice was escaping
their tread. So, automatically picking themselves up, those feet
started to bear my body in the direction of a spot on the sandy
bank where the winter-stripped branches of a willow tree were
writhing, and whither there were betaking themselves also Boev,
the old soldier, Budirin, and the brothers Diatlov. Meanwhile
the Morduine ran by my side, cursing vigorously as he did so,
and Ossip followed us, walking backwards.

"No, no, Narodetz," he said.

"But, my good Ossip--"

"Never mind. What has to be, has to be."

"But, as likely as not, we may remain stuck here for two days!"

"Never mind even if we DO remain stuck here."

"But what of the festival?"

"It will have, for this year at least, to be kept without you."

Seating himself on the sand, the old soldier lit his pipe and
growled:

"What cowards you all are! The bank was only fifteen sazheni
from us, yet you ran as though possessed!"

"With you yourself as leader," put in Mokei.

The old soldier took no notice, but added:

"What were you all afraid of? Once upon a time Christ Himself,
Our Little Father, died."

"And rose again," muttered the Morduine with a tinge of
resentment. Which led Boev to exclaim:

"Puppy, hold your tongue! What right have you to air your
opinions?"

"Besides, this is Good Friday, not Easter Day," the old soldier
concluded with severe, didactical mien.

In a gap of blue between the clouds there was shining the March
sun, and everywhere the ice was sparkling as though in derision
of ourselves. Shading his eyes, Ossip gazed at the dissolving
river, and said:

"Yes, it IS rising--but that will not last for long."

"No, but long enough to make us miss the festival," grumbled
Sashok.

Upon this the smooth, beardless face of the youthful Morduine, a
face dark and angular like the skin of an unpeeled potato,
assumed a resentful frown, and, blinking his eyes, he muttered:

"Yes, here we may have to sit--here where there's neither food
nor money! Other folk will be enjoying themselves, but we shall
have to remain hugging our hungry stomachs like a pack of dogs! "

Meanwhile Ossip's eyes had remained fixed upon the river, for
evidently his thoughts were far away, and it was in absentminded
fashion that he replied:

"Hunger cannot be considered where necessity impels. By
the way, what use are our damned icebreakers? For the protection
of barges and such? Why, the ice hasn't the sense to care. It
just goes sliding over a barge, and farewell is the word to THAT
bit of property! "

"Damn it, but none of us have a barge for property, have we?

"You had better go and talk to a fool."

"The truth is that the icebreaker ought to have been taken in
hand sooner."

Finally, the old soldier made a queer grimace, and ejaculated:

"Blockhead!"

From a barge a knot of sailors shouted something, and at the
same moment the river sent forth a sort of whiff of cruel
chilliness and brooding calm. The disposition of the pine boughs
now had changed. Nay, everything in sight was beginning to
assume a different air, as though everything were charged with
tense expectancy.

One of the younger men asked diffidently, beneath his breath:

"Mate Ossip, what are we going to do?"

"What do you say?" Ossip queried absent-mindedly.

"I say, what are we going to do? Just to sit here?"

To this Boev responded, with loud, nasal derision in his tone:

"Yes, my lad, for the Lord has seen fit to prevent you from
participating in His most holy festival."

And the old soldier, in support of his mate, extended his pipe
towards the river, and muttered with a grin:

"You want to cross to the town, do you? Well, be off with
you, and though the ice may give way beneath your feet
and drown you, at least you'll be taken to the police station,
and so get to your festival. For that's what you want, I
suppose?"

"True enough," Mokei re-echoed.

Then the sun went in, and the river grew darker, while the
town stood out more clearly. Ceaselessly, the younger men gazed
towards the town with wistful, gloomy eyes, though silently they
remained where they were.

Similarly, I myself was beginning to find things irksome and
uncomfortable, as always happens when a number of companions are
thinking different thoughts, and contain in themselves none of
that unity of will which alone can join men into a direct,
uniform force. Rather, I felt as though I could gladly leave my
companions and start out upon the ice alone.

Suddenly Ossip recovered his faculties. Rising, then doffing his
cap and making the sign of the cross in the direction of the
town, he said with a quiet, simple, yet somehow authoritative,
air:

"Very well, my mates. Go in peace, and may the Lord go with
you!"

"But whither?" asked Sashok, leaping to his feet. "To the
town? "

"Whither else?"

The old soldier was the only one not to rise, and with
conviction he remarked:

"It will result but in our getting drowned."

"Then stay where you are."

Ossip glanced around the party. Then he continued:

"Bestir yourselves! Look alive!"

Upon which all crowded together, and Boev, thrusting the tools
into a hole in the bank, groaned:

"The order 'go' has been given, so go we MUST, well though a
man in receipt of such an order might ask himself, 'How is it
going to be done?'"

Ossip seemed, in some way, to have grown younger and more
active, while the habitually shy, though good-humoured,
expression of his countenance was gone from his ruddy features,
and his darkened eyes had assumed an air of stern activity. Nay,
even his indolent, rolling gait had disappeared, and in his step
there was more firmness, more assurance, than had ever before
been the case.

"Let every man take a plank," he said, "and hold it in front
of him. Then, should anyone fall in (which God forbid!), the
plank-ends will catch upon the ice to either side of him, and
hold him up. Also, every man must avoid cracks in the ice. Yes,
and is there a rope handy? Here, Narodetz! Reach me that
spirit-level. Is everyone ready? I will walk first, and next
there must come--well, which is the heaviest?--you, soldier, and
then Mokei, and then the Morduine, and then Boev, and then
Mishuk, and then Sashok, and then Makarei, the lightest of all.
And do you all take off your caps before starting, and say a
prayer to the Mother of God. Ha! Here is Old Father Sun coming
out to greet us."

Readily did the men bare their tousled grey or flaxen heads as
momentarily the sun glanced through a bank of thin white vapour
before again concealing himself, as though averse to arousing
any false hopes.

"Now!" sharply commanded Ossip in his new-found voice. "And
may God go with us! Watch my feet, and don't crowd too much upon
one another, but keep each at a sazhen's distance or more--in
fact, the more the better. Yes, come, mates!"

With which, stuffing his cap into his bosom, and grasping the
spirit-level in his hands, Ossip set foot upon the ice with a
sliding, cautious, shuffling gait. At the same moment, there came
from the bank behind us a startled cry of:

"Where are you off to, you fools?"

"Never mind," said Ossip to ourselves. "Come along with you,
and don't stand staring."

"You blockheads!" the voice repeated. "You had far better
return."

"No, no! come on!" was Ossip's counter-command. "And as you
move think of God, or you'll never find yourselves among the
invited guests at His holy festival of Eastertide."

Next Ossip sounded a police whistle, which act led the old
soldier to exclaim:

"Oh, that's the way, mate! Good! Yes, you know what to do.  Now
notice will have been given to the police on the further bank,
and, if we're not drowned, we shall find ourselves clapped in
gaol when we get there. However, I'm not responsible."

In spite of this remonstrance, Ossip's sturdy voice drew his
companions after him as though they had been tied to a rope.

"Watch your feet carefully," once more he cried.

Our line of march was directed obliquely, and in the opposite
direction to the current. Also, I, as the rearmost of the party,
found it pleasant to note how the wary little Ossip of the
silvery head went looping over the ice with the deftness of a
hare, and practically no raising of the feet, while behind him
there trailed, in wild-goose fashion, and as though tied to a
single invisible string, six dark and undulating figures the
shadows of which kept making themselves visible on the ice, from
those figures' feet to points indefinitely remote. And as we
proceeded, all of us kept our heads lowered as though we had been
descending from a mountain in momentary fear of a false step.

Also, though the shouting in our rear kept growing in volume,
and we could tell that by this time a crowd had gathered, not a
word could we distinguish, but only a sort of ugly din.

In time our cautious march became for me a mere, mechanical,
wearisome task, for on ordinary occasions it was my custom to
maintain a pace of greater rapidity. Thus, eventually I sank into
the semiconscious condition amid which the soul turns to
vacuity, and one no longer thinks of oneself, but, on the
contrary issues from one's personality, and begins to see
objects with unwonted clarity, and to hear sounds with unwonted
precision. Under my feet the seams in the blue-grey, leaden ice
lay full of water, while as for the ice itself, it was blinding
in its expansive glitter, even though in places it had come to
be either cracked or bulbous, or had ground itself into powder
with its own movement, or had become heaped into slushy hummocks
of pumice-like sponginess and the consistency of broken glass.
And everywhere around me I could discern the chilly, gaping
smile of blue crevices which caught at my feet, and rendered the
tread of my boot-soles unstable. And ever, as we marched, could
the voices of Boev and the old soldier be heard speaking in
antiphony, like two pipes being fluted by one and the same pair
of lips.

"I won't be responsible," said the one voice.

"Nor I," responded the other.

"The only reason why I have come is that I was told to do so.
That's all about it."

"Yes, and the same with me."

"One man gives an order, and another man, perhaps a man a
thousand times more sensible than he, is forced to obey it."

"Is any man, in these days, sensible, seeing what a racket we
have to live among?"

By this time Ossip had tucked the skirts of his greatcoat into
his belt, while beneath those skirts his legs (clad in grey
cloth gaiters of a military pattern) were shuffling along as
lightly and easily as springs, and in a manner that suggested
that there was turning and twisting in front of him some person
whom, though desirous of barring to him the direct course, the
shortest route, Ossip successfully opposed and evaded by dint of
dodges and deviations to right and left, and occasional turns
about, and the execution of dance steps and loops and
semicircles. Meanwhile in the tones of Ossip's voice there was a
soft, musical ring that struck agreeably upon the ear, and
harmonised to admiration with the song of the bells just when we
were approaching the middle of the river's breadth of four
hundred sazheni. There resounded over the surface of the ice a
vicious rustle ' while a piece of ice slid from under my feet.
Stumbling, and powerless to retain my footing, I blundered down
upon my knees in helpless astonishment; and then, as I glanced
upstream, fear gripped at my throat, deprived me of speech, and
darkened all my vision. For the whole substance of the grey
ice-core had come to life and begun to heave itself upwards!
Yes, the hitherto level surface was thrusting forth sharp
angular ridges, and the air seemed full of a strange sound like
the trampling of some heavy being over broken glass.

With a quiet trickle there came a swirl of water around me,
while an adjacent pine bough cracked and squeaked as though it
too had come to life. My companions shouted, and collected into
a knot; whereupon, at once dominating and quelling the tense,
painful hubbub of sounds, there rang forth the voice of Ossip.

"Mother of God!" he shouted. "Scatter, lads! Get away from
one another, and keep each to himself! Now! Courage!"

With that, springing towards us as though wasps had been after
him, and grasping the spirit-level as though it had been a
weapon, he jabbed it to every side, as though fighting invisible
foes, while, just as the quivering town began, seemingly, to
glide past us, and the ice at my feet gave a screech and
crumbled to fragments beneath me, so that water bubbled to my
knees. I leapt up from where I was, and rushed blindly in
Ossip's direction.

"Where are you coming to, fool?" was his shout as he
brandished the spirit-level. "Stand still where you are!"

Indeed, Ossip seemed no longer to be Ossip at all, but a person
curiously younger, a person in whom all that had been familiar
in Ossip had become effaced. Yes, the once blue eyes had turned
to grey, and the figure added half an arshin to its stature as,
standing as erect as a newly made nail, and pressing both feet
together, the foreman stretched himself to his full height, and
shouted with his mouth open to its widest extent:

"Don't shuffle about, nor crowd upon one another, or I'll break
your heads!"

Whereafter, of myself in particular, he inquired as he raised the
spirit-level:

"What is the matter with YOU, pray?"

"I am feeling frightened," I muttered in response.

"Feeling frightened of WHAT, indeed?"

"Of being drowned."

"Pooh! Just you hold your tongue."

Yet the next moment he glanced at me, and added in a gentler,
quieter tone:

"None but a fool gets drowned. Pick yourself up and come along."

Then once more he shouted full-throated words of encouragement
to his men; and as he did so, his chest swelled and his
head rocked with the effort.

Yet, crackling and cracking, the ice was breaking up; and soon
it began slowly to bear us past the town. 'Twas as though some
unknown force ashore had awakened, and was striving to tear the
banks of the river in two, so much did the portion of the
landscape downstream seem to be standing still while the portion
level with us seemed to be receding in the opposite direction,
and thus causing a break to take place in the middle of the
picture.

And soon this movement, a movement agonisingly slow, deprived me
of my sense of being connected with the rest of the world,
until, as the whole receded, despair again gripped my heart and
unnerved my limbs. Roseate clouds were gliding across the sky
and causing stray fragments of the ice, which, seemingly,
yearned to engulf me, to assume reflected tints of a similar
hue. Yes, it was as though the birth of spring had reawakened
the universe, and was causing it to stretch itself, and to emit
deep, hurried, broken pants that cracked its bones as the river,
embedded in the earth's stout framework, revivified the whole
with thick, turbulent, ebullient blood.

And this sense of littleness, of impotence amid the calm,
assured movement of the earth's vast bulk, weighed upon my soul,
and evoked, and momentarily fanned to flame in me, the shameless
human question: "What if I should stretch forth my hand and lay
it upon the hill and the banks of the river, and say, 'Halt
until I come to you!'? "

Meanwhile the bells continued the mournful moaning of their
resonant, coppery notes; and that moaning led me to reflect that
within two days (on the night of the morrow) they would be
pealing a joyous welcome to the Resurrection Feast.

"Oh that all of us may live to hear that sound!" was my
unspoken thought.

Before my vision there kept quavering seven dark figures--figures
shuffling over the ice, and brandishing planks like oars. And,
wriggling like a lamprey in front of them was a little old
fellow, an old fellow resembling Saint Nicholas the
Wonder-Worker, an old fellow who kept crying softly, but
authoritatively:

"Do not stare about you!"

And ever the river was growing rougher and ruder; ever its
backbone was beginning to puiver and flounder like a whale
underfoot, with its liquescent body of cold, grey, murky water
bursting with increasing frequency from its shell of ice, and
lapping hungrily at our feet.

Yes, we were human beings traversing, as it were, a slender pole
over a bottomless abyss; and as we walked, the water's soft,
cantabile splash set me in mind of the depths below, of the
infinite time during which a body would continue sinking through
dense, chilly bulk until sight faded and the heart stopped
beating. Yes, before my mind's eye there arose men drowned and
devoured by crayfish, men with crumbling skulls and swollen
features, and glassy, bulging eyes and puffy hands and
outstretched fingers and palms of which the skin had rotted off
with the damp.

The first to fall in was Mokei Budirin. He had been walking next
ahead of the Morduine, and, as a man habitually silent and
absorbed, proceeding on his way more quietly than the rest.
Suddenly something had seemed to catch at his legs, and he had
disappeared until only his head and his hands, as the latter
clutched at his plank, had been left above-level.

"Run and help him, somebody!" was Ossip's instant cry. "Yes,
but not all of you--just one or two. Help him I say!"

The spluttering Mokei, however, said to the Morduine and myself:

"No; do you move away, mates, for I shall best help myself.
Never you mind."

And, sure enough, he did succeed in drawing himself out on to
the ice without assistance. Whereafter he remarked as he shook
himself:

"A nice pickle, this, to be in! I might as well have been
drowned!"

And, in fact, at the moment he looked, with his chattering teeth
and great tongue licking a dripping moustache, precisely like a
large, good-natured dog.

Then I remembered how, a month earlier, he had accidentally
driven the blade of his axe through the joint of his left thumb,
and, merely picking up the white fragment of flesh with the nail
turning blue, and scanning it with his unfathomable eyes, had
remarked, as though it was he himself that had been at fault:

"How often before I have injured that thumb, I could not say.
And when once I dislocated it, I went on working with it longer
than was right. . . . Now I will go and bury it."

With which, carefully wrapping up the fragment in some shavings,
he had thrust the whole into his pocket, and bandaged the
wounded hand,

Similarly, after that, did Boev, the man next in order behind
Mokei, contrive to wrest himself from the grasp of the ice,
though, on immersion, he started bawling, "Mates, I shall
drown! I am dead already! Help me, help me!" and became so
cramped with terror as to be extricated only with great
difficulty, while amid the general confusion the Morduine too
nearly slipped into the water.

"A narrow shave of saying Vespers tonight with the devils in
Hell!" he remarked as he clambered back, and stood grinning
with an even more angular and attenuated appearance than usual.

The next moment Boev achieved a second plunge, and screamed, as
before, for help.

"Don't shout, you goat of a Yashka!" Ossip exclaimed as he
threatened him with the spirit-level. "Why scare people? I'll
give it you! Look here, lads. Let every man take off his belt
and turn out his pockets. Then he'll walk lighter."

Toothed jaws gaped and crunched at us at every step, and
vomited thick spittle; at every tenth step their keen blue fangs
reached for our lives. Meanwhile, the soaked condition of our
boots and clothes had rendered us as slimy as though smeared
with paste. Also, it so weighed us down as to hinder any active
movement, and to cause each step to be taken cautiously, slowly,
silently, and with ponderous diffidence.

Yet, soaked though we were, Ossip might verily have known the
number of cracks in advance, so smooth and harelike was his
progress from floe to floe as at intervals he faced about,
watched us, and cried sonorously:

"That's the way to do it, eh?"

Yes, he absolutely played with the river, and though it kept
catching at his diminutive form, he always evaded it,
circumvented its movements, and avoided its snares. Nay, capable
even of directing its trend did he seem, and of thrusting under
our feet only the largest and firmest floes.

"Lads, there is no need to be downhearted," he would cry at
intervals.

"Ah, that brave Ossip!" the Morduine once ejaculated. "In very
truth is he a man, and no mistake! Just look at him!"

The closer we approached the further shore, the thinner and the
more brittle did the ice become, and the more liable we to
break through it. By this time the town had nearly passed us,
and we were bidding fair to be carried out into the Volga, where
the ice would still be sound, and, as likely as not, draw us
under itself.

"By your leave, we are going to be drowned," the Morduine
murmured as he glanced at the blue shadow of eventide on our
left.

And simultaneously, as though compassionating our lot, a large
floe grounded upon the bank, glided upwards with a cracking and
a crashing, and there held fast!

"Run, all of you!" came a furious shout from Ossip.
"Hurry up, now! Put your very best legs foremost!"

For myself, as I sprang upon the floe I lost my footing, and,
falling headlong and remaining seated on the hither end of the
floe amid a shower of spray, saw five of my seven comrades rush
past, pushing and jostling, as they made for the shore. But
presently the Morduine turned and halted beside me, with the
intention of rendering Ossip assistance.

"Run, you young fools!" the latter exclaimed. "Come! Be off
with you!"

Somehow in his face there was now a livid, uncertain air, while
his eyes had lost their fire, and his mouth was curiously agape.

"No, mate. Do YOU get up," was my counter-adjuration.

"Unfortunately, I have hurt my leg," he replied with his head
bent down. "In fact, I am not sure that I can get up."

However, we contrived to raise him and carry him ashore with an
arm of his resting on each of our necks. Meanwhile he growled
with chattering teeth:

"Aha, you river devils! Drown me if you can! But I've not given
you a chance, the Lord be thanked! Hi, look out! The ice won't
bear the three of us. Mind how you step, and choose places where
the ice is bare of snow. There it's firmer. No, a better plan
still would be to leave me where I am."

Next, with a frowning scrutiny of my face, he inquired:

"That notebook of our misdeeds--hasn't it had a wetting and got
done for?"

That very moment, as we stepped from the stranded floe (in
grounding, it had crushed and shattered a small boat), such part
of it as lay in the water gave a loud crack, and, swaying to and
fro, and emitting a gurgling sound, floated clear of the rest.

"Ah!" was the Morduine's quizzical comment. "YOU knew well
enough what needed to be done."

Wet, and chilled to the bone, though relieved in spirit, we
stepped ashore to find a crowd of townspeople in conversation
with Boev and the old soldier. And as we deposited our charge
under the lea of a pile of logs he shouted cheerfully:

"Mates, Makarei's notebook is done for, soaked through!"  And
since the notebook in question was weighing upon my breast like
a brick, I pulled it out unseen, and hurled it far into the
river with a plop like that of a frog.

As for the Diatlovs, they lost no time in setting out in search
of vodka in the tavern on the hill, and slapped one another on
the back as they ran, and could be heard shouting, "Hurrah,
hurrah!"

Upon this, a tall old man with the beard of an apostle and the
eyes of a brigand muttered:

"Infidels, why disturb peaceful folk like this? You ought to be
thrashed!"

Whereupon Boev, who was changing his clothes, retorted:

"What do you mean by 'disturb'?"

"Besides," put in the old soldier, " even though we are
Christians like yourself, we might as well have been drowned for
all that you did to help us."

"What could we have done?"

Meanwhile Ossip had remained lying on the ground with one leg
stretched out at full length, and tremulous hands fumbling at
his greatcoat as under his breath he muttered:

"Holy Mother, how wet I am! My clothes, though I have only worn
them a year, are ruined for ever!"

Moreover, he seemed now to have shrunken again in stature--to
have become crumpled up like a man run over. Indeed, as he lay
he seemed actually to be melting, so continuously was his bulk
decreasing in size.

But suddenly he raised himself to a sitting posture, groaned,
and exclaimed in high-pitched, wrathful accents:

"May the devil take you all! Be off with you to your washhouses
and churches! Yes, be off, for it seems that, as God couldn't
keep His holy festival without you, I've had to stand within an
ace of death and to spoil my clothes-yes, all that you fellows
should be got out of your fix!"

Nevertheless, the men merely continued taking off their boots,
and wringing out their clothes, and conversing with sundry
gasps and grunts with the bystanders. So presently Ossip
resumed:

"What are you thinking of, you fools? The washhouse is the best
place for you, for if the police get you, they'll soon find you
a lodging, and no mistake!"

One of the townspeople put in officiously:

"Aye, aye. The police have been sent for."

And this led Boev to exclaim to Ossip:

"Why pretend like that?"

"Pretend? I?"

"Yes--you."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that it was you who egged us on to cross the river."

"You say that it was I?"

"I do."

"Indeed?"

"Aye," put in Budirin quietly, but incisively. And him the
Morduine supported by saying in a sullen undertone:

"It was you, mate. By God it was. It would seem that you have
forgotten."

"Yes, you started all this business," the old soldier
corroborated, in dour, ponderous accents.

"Forgotten, indeed? HE? " was Boev's heated exclamation.

"How can you say such a thing? Well, let him not try to shift
the responsibility on to others--that's all! WE'LL see, right
enough, that he goes through with it!"

To this Ossip made no reply, but gazed frowningly at his
dripping, half-clad men.

All at once, with a curious outburst of mingled smiles and tears
(it would be hard to say which), he shrugged his shoulders,
threw up his hands, and muttered:

"Yes, it IS true. If it please you, it was I that contrived the
idea."

"Of COURSE it was! " the old soldier cried triumphantly.

Ossip turned his eyes again to where the river was seething like
a bowl of porridge, and, letting his eyes fall with a frown,
continued:

"In a moment of forgetfulness I did it. Yet how is it that we
were not all drowned? Well, you wouldn't understand even if I
were to tell you. No, by God, you wouldn't! . . . Don't be angry
with me, mates. Pardon me for the festival's sake, for I am
feeling uneasy of mind. Yes, I it was that egged you on to cross
the river, the old fool that I was!"

"Aha!" exclaimed Boev. "But, had I been drowned, what should
you have said THEN?"

In fact, by this time Ossip seemed conscious to the full of the
futility and the senselessness of what he had done: and in his
state of sliminess, as he sat nodding his head, picking at the
sand, looking at no one, and emitting a torrent of remorseful
words, he reminded me strongly of a new-born calf.

And as I watched him I thought to myself:

"Where now is the leader of men who could draw his fellows in
his train with so much care and skill and authority?"

And into my soul there trickled an uneasy sense of something
lacking. Seating myself beside Ossip (for I desired still to
retain a measure of my late impression of him), I said to him in
an undertone:

"Soon you will be all right again."

With a sideways glance he muttered in reply, as he combed his
beard:

"Well, you saw what happened just now. Always do things so
happen."

While for the benefit of the men he added:

"That was a good jest of mine, eh?"

The summit of the hill which lay crouching, like a great beast,
on the brink of the river was standing out clearly against the
fast darkening sky; while a clump of trees thereon had grown
black, and everywhere blue shadows of the spring eventide were
coming into view, and looming between the housetops where the
houses lay pressed like scabs against the hill's opaque surface,
and peering from the moist, red jaws of the ravine which, gaping
towards the river, seemed as though it were stretching forth for
a draught of water.

Also, by now the rustling and crunching of the ice on the
similarly darkening river was beginning to assume a deeper note,
and at times a floe would thrust one of its extremities into the
bank as a pig thrusts its snout into the earth, and there remain
motionless before once more beginning to sway, tearing itself
free, and floating away down the river as another such floe
glided into its place.

And ever more and more swiftly was the water rising, and washing
away soil from the bank, and spreading a thick sediment over the
dark blue surface of the river. And as it did so, there resounded
in the air a strange noise as of chewing and champing, a noise
as though some huge wild animal were masticating, and licking
itself with its great long tongue.

And still there continued to come from the town the melancholy,
distance-softened, sweet-toned song of the bells.

Presently, the brothers Diatlov appeared descending from the hill
with bottles in their hands, and sporting like a couple of
joyous puppies, while to intercept them there could be seen
advancing along the bank of the river a grey-coated police
sergeant and two black-coated constables.

"0h Lord!" groaned Ossip as he rubbed his knee.

As for the townsfolk, they had no love for the police, so
hastened to withdraw to a little distance, where they silently
awaited the officers' approach. Before long the sergeant, a
little, withered sort of a fellow with diminutive features and a
sandy, stubby moustache, called out in gruff, stern, hoarse,
laboured accents:

"So here you are, you rascals!"

Ossip prised himself up from the ground with his elbow, and said
hurriedly:

"It was I that contrived the idea of the thing, your
Excellency; but, pray let me off in honour of the festival."

"What do you say, you--?" the sergeant began, but his bluster
was lost amid the swift flow of Ossip's further conciliatory
words.

"We are folk of this town," Ossip continued, "who tonight
found ourselves stranded on the further bank, with nothing to
buy bread with, even though the day after tomorrow will be
Christ's day, the day when Christians like ourselves wish to
clean themselves up a little, and to go to church. So I said to
my mates, 'Be off with you, my good fellows, and may God send
that no mishap befall you!' And for this presumptuousness of
mine I have been punished already, for, as you can see, have as
good as broken my leg."

"Yes," ejaculated the sergeant grimly. "But if you had been
drowned, what then?"

Ossip sighed wearily.

"What then, do you say, your Excellency? Why, then, nothing,
with your permission."

This led the officer to start railing at the culprit, while the
crowd listened as silently and attentively as though he had been
saying something worthy to be heard and heeded, rather than
foully and cynically miscalling their mothers.

Lastly, our names having been noted, the police withdrew, while
each of us drank a dram of vodka (and thereby gained a measure
of warmth and comfort), and then began to make for our several
homes. Ossip followed the police with derisive eyes; whereafter,
he leapt to his feet with a nimble, adroit movement, and crossed
himself with punctilious piety.

"That's all about it, thank God!" he exclaimed.

"What?" sniggered Boev, now both disillusioned and astonished.
"Do you really mean to say that that leg of yours is better
already? Or do you mean that it never was injured at all? "

"Ah! So you wish that it HAD been injured, eh?"

"The rascal of a Petrushka!" the other exclaimed.

"Now," commanded Ossip, "do all of you be off, mates." And
with that he pulled his wet cap on to his head.

I accompanied him--walking a little behind the rest. As he limped
along, he said in an undertone-said kindly-- and as though he were
communicating a secret known only to himself:

"Whatsoever one may do, and whithersoever one may turn, one
will find that life cannot be lived without a measure of fraud
and deceit. For that is what life IS, Makarei, the devil fly
away with it! . . . I suppose you're making for the hill? Well,
I'll keep you company."

Darkness had fallen, but at a certain spot some red and yellow
lamps, lamps the beams of which seemed to be saying, "Come up
hither!" were shining through the obscurity.

Meanwhile, as we proceeded in the direction of the bells that
were ringing on the hill, rivulets of water flowed with a murmur
under our feet, and Ossip's kindly voice kept mingling with
their sound.

"See," he continued, "how easily I befooled that sergeant!
That is how things have to be done, Makarei--one has to keep folk
from knowing one's business, yet to make them think that they
are the chief persons concerned, and the persons whose wit has
put the cap on the whole."

Yet as I listened to his speech, while supporting his steps, I
could make little of it.

Nor did I care to make very much of it, for I was of a simple
and easygoing nature. And though at the moment I could not have
told whether I really liked Ossip, I would still have followed
his lead in any direction--yes, even across the river again,
though the ice had been giving way beneath me.

And as we proceeded, and the bells echoed and re-echoed, I
thought to myself with a spasm of joy:

"Ah, many times may I thus walk to greet the spring!"

While Ossip said with a sigh:

"The human soul is a winged thing. Even in sleep it flies."

***********************

A winged thing? Yes, and a thing of wonder.



GUBIN

The place where I first saw him was a tavern wherein, ensconced
in the chimney-corner, and facing a table, he was exclaiming
stutteringly, "Oh, I know the truth about you all! Yes, I know
the truth about you!" while standing in a semicircle in front
of him, and unconsciously rendering him more and more excited
with their sarcastic interpolations, were some tradesmen of the
superior sort--five in number. One of them remarked indifferently:

"How should you NOT know the truth about us, seeing that you do
nothing but slander us?"

Shabby, in fact in rags, Gubin at that moment reminded me of a
homeless dog which, having strayed into a strange street, has
found itself held up by a band of dogs of superior strength,
and, seized with nervousness, is sitting back on its haunches
and sweeping the dust with its tail; and, with growls, and
occasional barings of its fangs, and sundry barkings, attempting
now to intimidate its adversaries, and now to conciliate them.
Meanwhile, having perceived the stranger's helplessness and
insignificance, the native pack is beginning to moderate its
attitude, in the conviction that, though continued maintenance
of dignity is imperative, it is not worthwhile to pick a
quarrel so long as an occasional yelp be vented in the
stranger's face.

"To whom are you of any use?" one of the tradesmen at length
inquired.

"Not a man of us but may be of use."

"To whom, then?" . . .

I had long since grown familiar with tavern disputes concerning
verities, and not infrequently seen those disputes develop into
open brawls; but never had I permitted myself to be drawn into
their toils, or to be set wandering amid their tangles like a
blind man negotiating a number of hillocks. Moreover, just
before this encounter with Gubin, I had arrived at a dim surmise
that when such differences were carried to the point of madness
and bloodshed. Really,they constituted an expression of the
unmeaning, hopeless, melancholy life that is lived in the wilder
and more remote districts of Russia--of the life that is lived on
swampy banks of dingy rivers, and in our smaller and more
God-forgotten towns. For it would seem that in such places men
have nothing to look for, nor any knowledge of how to look for
anything; wherefore, they brawl and shout in vain attempts to
dissipate despondency. . . .

I myself was sitting near Gubin, but on the other side of the
table. Yet, this was not because his outbursts and the
tradesmen's retorts thereto were a pleasure to listen to, since
to me both the one and the other seemed about as futile as
beating the air.

"To whom are YOU of use?"

"To himself every man can be useful."

"But what good can one do oneself?" . . .

The windows of the tavern were open, while in the pendent,
undulating cloud of blue smoke that the flames of the lamps
emitted, those lamps looked like so many yellow pitchers floating
amid the waters of a stagnant pond. Out of doors there was
brooding the quiet of an August night, and not a rustle, not a
whisper was there to be heard. Hence, as numbed with melancholy,
I gazed at the inky heavens and limpid stars I thought to myself:

"Surely, never were the sky and the stars meant to look down
upon a life like this, a life like this?"

Suddenly someone said with the subdued assurance of a person
reading aloud from a written document:

"Unless the peasants of Kubarovo keep a watch upon their timber
lands, the sun will fire them tomorrow, and then the Birkins'
forest also will catch alight."

For a moment the dispute died down. Then, as it were cleaving
the silence, a voice said stutteringly:

"Who cares about the significance of the word 'truth'?"

And the words-- heavy, jumbled, and clumsy-- filled me with
despondent reflections. Then again the voices rose--this time in
louder and more venomous accents, and with their din recalled to
me, by some accident, the foolish lines:

The gods did give men water
To wash in, and to drink;
Yet man has made it but a pool
In which his woes to sink.

Presently I moved outside and, seating myself on the steps of
the veranda, fell to contemplating the dull, blurred windows of
the Archpriest's house on the other side of the square, and to
watching how black shadows kept flitting to and fro behind their
panes as the faint, lugubrious notes of a guitar made themselves
heard. And a high-pitched, irritable voice kept repeating at
intervals: "Allow me. Pray, permit me to speak," and being
answered by a voice which intermittently shot into the silence,
as into a bottomless sack, the words: "No, do you wait a
moment, do you wait a moment."

Surrounded by the darkness, the houses looked stunted like
gravestones, with a line of black trees above their roofs that
loomed shadowy and cloud-like. Only in the furthest corner of
the expanse was the light of a solitary street lamp bearing a
resemblance to the disk of a stationary, resplendent dandelion.

Over everything was melancholy. Far from inviting was the
general outlook. So much was this the case that, had, at that
moment, anyone stolen upon me from behind the bushes and dealt
me a sudden blow on the head, I should merely have sunk to earth
without attempting to see who my assailant had been.

Often, in those days, was I in this mood, for it clave to me as
faithfully as a dog--never did it wholly leave me.

"It was for men like THOSE that this fair earth of ours was
bestowed upon us!" I thought to myself.

Suddenly, with a clatter, someone ran out of the door of the
tavern, slid down the steps, fell headlong at their foot,
quickly regained his equilibrium, and disappeared in the
darkness after exclaiming in a threatening voice:

"Oh, I'LL pay you out! I'LL skin you, you damned... !"

Whereafter two figures that also appeared in the doorway said as
they stood talking to one another:

"You heard him threaten to fire the place, did you not?"

"Yes, I did. But why should he want to fire it? "

"Because he is a dangerous rascal."

Presently, slinging my wallet upon my back, I pursued my onward
way along a street that was fenced on either side with a tall
palisade. As I proceeded, long grasses kept catching at my feet
and rustling drily. And so warm was the night as to render the
payment of a lodging fee superfluous; and the more so since in
the neighbourhood of the cemetery, where an advanced guard of
young pines had pushed forward to the cemetery wall and littered
the sandy ground, with a carpet of red, dry cones, there were
sleeping-places prepared in advance.

Suddenly from the darkness there emerged, to recoil again, a
man's tall figure.

"Who is that? Who is it?" asked the hoarse, nervous voice of
Gubin in dissipation of the deathlike stillness.

Which said, he and I fell into step with one another. As we
proceeded he inquired whence I had come, and why I was still
abroad. Whereafter he extended to me, as to an old acquaintance,
the invitation:

"Will you come and sleep at my place? My house is near here,
and as for work, I will find you a job tomorrow. In fact, as it
happens, I am needing a man to help me clean out a well at the
Birkins' place. Will the job suit you? Very well, then. Always I
like to settle things overnight, as it is at night that I can
best see through people."

The "house" turned out to be nothing more than an old
one-eyed, hunchbacked washhouse or shanty which, bulging of
wall, stood wedged against the clayey slope of a ravine as
though it would fain bury itself amid the boughs of the
neighbouring arbutus trees and elders.

Without striking a light, Gubin flung himself upon some mouldy
hay that littered a threshold as narrow as the threshold of a
dog-kennel, and said to me with an air of authority as he did so:

"I will sleep with my head towards the door, for the atmosphere
here is a trifle confined."

And, true enough, the place reeked of elderberries, soap, burnt
stuff, and decayed leaves. I could not conceive why I had come
to such a spot.

The twisted branches of the neighbouring trees hung motionless
athwart the sky, and concealed from view the golden dust of the
Milky Way, while across the Oka an owl kept screeching, and the
strange, arresting remarks of my companion pelted me like
showers of peas.

"Do not be surprised that I should live in a remote ravine," he
said. "I, whose hand is against every man, can at least feel
lord of what I survey here."

Too dark was it for me to see my host's face, but my memory
recalled his bald cranium, and the yellow light of the lamps
falling upon a nose as long as a woodpecker's beak, a pair of
grey and stubbly cheeks, a pair of thin lips covered by a
bristling moustache, a mouth sharp-cut as with a knife, and full
of black, evil-looking stumps, a pair of pointed, sensitive,
mouse-like ears, and a clean-shaven chin. The last feature in no
way consorted with his visage, or with his whole appearance; but
at least it rendered him worthy of remark, and enabled one to
realise that one had to deal with neither a peasant nor a
soldier nor a tradesman, but with a man peculiar to himself.
Also, his frame was lanky, with long arms and legs, and pointed
knees and elbows. In fact, so like a piece of string was his
body that to twist it round and round, or even to tie it into a
knot, would, seemingly, have been easy enough.

For awhile I found his speech difficult to follow; wherefore,
silently I gazed at the sky, where the stars appeared to be
playing at follow-my-leader.

"Are you asleep?" at length he inquired.

"No, I am not. Why do you shave your beard?"

"Why do you ask?"

"Because, if you will pardon me, I think your face would look
better bearded."

With a short laugh he exclaimed:

"Bearded? Ah, sloven! Bearded, indeed!"

To which he added more gravely:

"Both Peter the Great and Nicholas I were wiser than you, for
they ordained that whosoever should be bearded should have his
nose slit, and be fined a hundred roubles. Did you ever hear of
that? "

"No."

"And from the same source, from the beard, arose also the Great
Schism."

His manner of speaking was too rapid to be articulate, and, in
leaving his mouth, his words caused his lips to bare stumps and
gums amid which they lost their way, became disintegrated, and
issued, as it were, in an incomplete state.

"Everyone," he continued, "knows that life is lived more
easily with a beard than without one, since with a beard lies
are more easily told--they can be told, and then hidden in the
masses of hair. Hence we ought to go through life with our faces
naked, since such faces render untruthfulness more difficult,
and prevent their owners from prevaricating without the fact
becoming plain to all."

"But what about women?"

"What about women? Well, women can always lie to their husbands
successfully, but not to all the town, to all the world, to folk
in general. Moreover, since a woman's real business in life is
the same as that of the hen, to rear young, what can it matter
if she DOES cackle a few falsehoods, provided that she be
neither a priest nor a mayor nor a tchinovnik, and does not
possess any authority, and cannot establish laws? For the really
important point is that the law itself should not lie, but ever
uphold truth pure and simple. Long has the prevalent illegality
disgusted me."

The door of the shanty was standing open, and amid the outer
darkness, as in a church, the trees looked like pillars, and the
white stems of the birches like silver candelabra tipped with a
thousand lights, or dimly-seen choristers with faces showing
pale above sacramental vestments of black. All my soul was full
of a sort of painful restlessness. It was a feeling as though I
should live to rise and go forth into the darkness, and offer
battle to the terrors of the night; yet ever, as my companion's
torrential speech caught and held my attention, it detained me
where I was.

"My father was a man of no little originality and character," he
went on. "Wherefore, none of the townsfolk liked him. By the age
of twenty he had risen to be an alderman, yet never to the end
could get the better of folk's stubbornness and stupidity, even
though he made it his custom to treat all and sundry to food and
drink, and to reason with them. No, not even at the last did he
attain his due. People feared him because he revolutionised
everything, revolutionised it down to the very roots; the truth
being that he had grasped the one essential fact that law and
order must be driven, like nails, into the people's very vitals."

Mice squeaked under the floor, and on the further side of the
Oka an owl screeched, while amid the pitch-black heavens I could
see a number of blotches intermittently lightening to an elusive
red and blurring the faint glitter of the stars.

"It was one o'clock in the morning when my father died," Gubin
continued." And upon myself, who was seventeen and had just
finished my course at the municipal school of Riazan, there
devolved, naturally enough, all the enmity that my father had
incurred during his lifetime. 'He is just like his sire,' folk
said. Also, I was alone, absolutely alone, in the world, since
my mother had lost her reason two years before my father's
death, and passed away in a frenzy. However, I had an uncle, a
retired unter-officier who was both a sluggard, a tippler, and a
hero (a hero because he had had his eyes shot out at Plevna, and
his left arm injured in a manner which had induced paralysis,
and his breast adorned with the military cross and a set of
medals). And sometimes, this uncle of mine would rally me on my
learning. For instance, 'Scholar,' he would say, 'what does
"tiversia " mean?' 'No such word exists,' would be my reply,
and thereupon he would seize me by the hair, for he was rather
an awkward person to deal with. Another factor as concerned
making me ashamed of my scholarship was the ignorance of the
townspeople in general, and in the end I became the common butt,
a sort of 'holy idiot.'"

So greatly did these recollections move Gubin that he rose and
transferred his position to the door of the hut, where, a dark
blur against the square of blue, he lit a gurgling pipe, and
puffed thereat until his long, conical nose glowed. Presently
the surging stream of words began again:

"At twenty I married an orphan, and when she fell ill and died
childless I found myself alone once more, and without an adviser
or a friend. However, still I continued both to live and to look
about me. And in time, I perceived that life is not lived wholly
as it should be."

"What in life is 'not lived wholly as it should be'?"

"Everything in life. For life is mere folly, mere fatuous
nonsense. The truth is that our dogs do not bark always at the
right moment. For instance, when I said to folk, 'How would it
be if we were to open a technical school for girls?' They
merely laughed and replied, 'Trade workers are hopeless
drunkards. Already have we enough of them. Besides, hitherto
women have contrived to get on WITHOUT education.' And when next
I conceived a scheme for instituting a match factory, it befell
that the factory was burnt down during its first year of
existence, and I found myself once more at a loose end. Next a
certain woman got hold of me, and I flitted about her like a
martin around a belfry, and so lost my head as to live life as
though I were not on earth at all--for three years I did not know
even what I was doing, and only when I recovered my senses did I
perceive myself to be a pauper, and my all, every single thing
that I had possessed, to have passed into HER white hands. Yes,
at twenty-eight I found myself a beggar. Yet I have never wholly
regretted the fact, for certainly for a time I lived life as few
men ever live it. 'Take my all--take it!' I used to say to her.
And, truly enough, I should never have done much good with my
father's fortune, whereas she--well, so it befell. Somehow I
think that in those days my opinions must have been different
from now--now that I have lost everything. . . . Yet the woman
used to say, 'You have NOT lost everything,' and she had wit
enough to fit out a whole townful of people."

"This woman--who was she? "

"The wife of a merchant. Whenever she unrobed and said, 'Come!
What is this body of mine worth?' I used to make reply, 'A price
that is beyond compute.' . . . So within three years everything
that I possessed vanished like smoke. Sometimes, of course, folk
laughed at and jibed at me; nor did I ever refute them. But now
that I have come to have a better understanding of life's
affairs, I see that life is not wholly lived as it should be. For
that matter, too, I do not hold my tongue on the subject, for
that is not my way--still left to me I have a tongue and my soul.
The same reason accounts for the fact that no one likes me, and
that by everyone I am looked upon as a fool."

"How, in your opinion, ought life to be lived?"

Without answering me at once, Gubin sucked at his pipe until
his nose made a glowing red blur in the darkness. Then he
muttered slowly:

"How life ought to be lived no one could say exactly. And this
though I have given much thought to the subject, and still am
doing so."

I found it no difficult matter to form a mental picture of the
desolate existence which this man must be leading--this man whom
all his fellows both derided and shunned. For at that time I too
was bidding fair to fail in life, and had my heart in the grip
of ceaseless despondency.

The truth is that of futile people Russia is over-full. Many
such I myself have known, and always they have attracted me as
strongly and mysteriously as a magnet. Always they have struck me
more favourably than the provincial-minded majority who live for
food and work alone, and put away from them all that could
conceivably render their bread-winning difficult, or prevent
them from snatching bread out of the hands of their weaker
neighbours. For most such folk are gloomy and self-contained,
with hearts that have turned to wood, and an outlook that ever
reverts to the past; unless, indeed, they be folk of spurious
good nature, an addition to talkativeness, and an apparent
bonhomie which veils a frigid, grey interior, and conveys an
impression of cruelty and greed of all that life contains.

Always, in the end, I have detected in such folk something
wintry, something that makes them seem, as it were, to be
spending spring and summer in expectation solely of the winter
season, with its long nights, and its cold of an austerity which
forces one for ever to be consuming food.

Yet seldom among this distasteful and wearisome crowd of wintry
folk is there to be encountered a man who has altogether proved
a failure. But if he has done so, he will be found to be a man
whose nature is of a more thoughtful, a more truly existent, a
more clear-sighted cast than that of his fellows--a man who at
least can look beyond the boundaries of the trite and
commonplace, and whose mentality has a greater capacity for
attaining spiritual fulfilment, and is more desirous of doing
so, than the mentality of his compeers. That is to say, in such
a man one can always detect a striving for space, as a man who,
loving light, carries light in himself.

Unfortunately, all too often is that light only the fugitive
phosphorescence of putrefaction; wherefore as one contemplates
him one soon begins to realise with bitterness and vexation and
disappointment that he is but a sluggard, but a braggart, but
one who is petty and weak and blinded with conceit and distorted
with envy, but one between whose word and whose deed there gapes
a disparity even wider and deeper than the disparity which
divides the word from the deed of the man of winter, of the man
who, though he be as tardy as a snail, at least is making some
way in the world, in contradistinction from the failure who
revolves ever in a single spot, like some barren old maid before
the reflection in her looking-glass.

Hence, as I listened to Gubin, there recurred to me more than
one instance of his type.

"Yes, I have succeeded in observing life throughout," he
muttered drowsily as his head sank slowly upon his breast.

And sleep overtook myself with similar suddenness. Apparently
that slumber was of a few minutes' duration only, yet what
aroused me was Gubin pulling at my leg.

"Get up now," he said. "It is time that we were off."

And as his bluish-grey eyes peered into my face, somehow I
derived from their mournful expression a sense of
intellectuality. Beneath the hair on his hollow cheeks were
reddish veins, while similar veins, bluish in tint, covered with
a network his temples, and his bare arms had the appearance of
being made of tanned leather.

Dawn had not yet broken when we rose and proceeded through the
slumbering streets beneath a sky that was of a dull yellow, and
amid an atmosphere that was full of the smell of burning.

"Five days now has the forest been on fire," observed Gubin.
"Yet the fools cannot succeed in putting it out."

Presently the establishment of the merchants Birkin lay before
us, an establishment of curious aspect, since it constituted,
rather, a conglomeration of appendages to a main building of
ground floor and attics, with four windows facing on to the
street, and a series of underpropping annexes. That series
extended to the wing, and was solid and permanent, and bade fair
to overflow into the courtyard, and through the entrance-gates,
and across the street, and to the very kitchen-garden and
flower-garden themselves. Also, it seemed to have been stolen
piecemeal from somewhere, and at different periods, and from
different localities, and tacked at haphazard on to the walls of
the parent erection. Moreover, all the windows of the latter
were small, and in their green panes, as they confronted the
world, there was a timid and suspicious air, while, in
particular, the three windows which faced upon the courtyard had
iron bars to them. Lastly, there were posted, sentinel-like on
the entrance-steps, two water-butts as a precaution against fire.

"What think you of the place?" Gubin muttered as he peered into
the well. "Isn't it a barbarous hole? The right thing would be
to pull it down wholesale, and then rebuild it on larger and
less restricted lines. Yet these fools merely go tacking new
additions on to the old."

For awhile his lips moved as in an incantation. Then he frowned,
glanced shrewdly at the structures in question, and continued
softly:

"I may say in passing that the place is MINE."

"YOURS? "

"Yes, mine. At all events, so it used to be."

And he pulled a grimace as though he had got the toothache
before adding with an air of command:

"Come! I will pump out the water, and YOU shall carry it to the
entrance-steps and fill the water-butts. Here is a pail, and
here a ladder."

Whereafter, with a considerable display of strength, he set
about his portion of the task, whilst I myself took pail in hand
and advanced towards the steps to find that the water-butts
were so rotten that, instead of retaining the water, they let it
leak out into the courtyard. Gubin said with an oath:

"Fine masters these--masters who grudge one a groat, and
squander a rouble! What if a fire WERE to break out? Oh, the
blockheads!"

Presently, the proprietors in person issued into the courtyard
--the stout, bald Peter Birkin, a man whose face was flushed even
to the whites of his shifty eyes, and, close behind him, eke his
shadow, Jonah Birkin-- a person of sandy, sullen mien, and
overhanging brows, and dull, heavy eyes.

"Good day, dear sir," said Peter Birkin thinly, as with a puffy
hand he raised from his head a cloth cap, while Jonah nodded.
And then, with a sidelong glance at myself, asked in a deep bass
voice:

"Who is this young man?"

Large and important like peacocks, the pair then shuffled across
the wet yard, and in so doing, went to much trouble to avoid
soiling their polished shoes. Next Peter said to his brother:

"Have you noticed that the water-butts are rotted? Oh, that
fine Yakinika! He ought long ago to have been dismissed."

"Who is that young man over there?" Jonah repeated with an air
of asperity.

"The son of his father and mother," Gubin replied quietly, and
without so much as a glance at the brothers.

"Well, come along," snuffled Peter with a drawling of his
vowels. "It is high time that we were moving. It doesn't matter
who the young man may be."

And with that they slip-slopped across to the entrance gates,
while Gubin gazed after them with knitted brows, and as the
brothers were disappearing through the wicket said carelessly:

" The old sheep! They live solely by the wits of their
stepmother, and if it were not for her, they would long ago have
come to grief. Yes, she is a woman beyond words clever. Once
upon a time there were three brothers--Peter, Alexis, and Jonah;
but, unfortunately, Alexis got killed in a brawl. A fine, tall
fellow HE was, whereas these two are a pair of gluttons, like
everyone else in this town. Not for nothing do three loaves
figure on the municipal arms! Now, to work again! Or shall we
take a rest?"

Here there stepped on to the veranda a tall, well-grown young
woman in an open pink bodice and a blue skirt who, shading blue
eyes with her hand, scanned the courtyard and the steps, and
said with some diffidence:

"Good day, Yakov Vasilitch."

With a good-humoured glance in response, and his mouth open,
Gubin waved a hand in greeting:

"Good day to YOU, Nadezhda Ivanovna," he replied. "How are you
this morning? "

Somehow this made her blush, and cross her arms upon her
ample bosom, while her kindly, rounded, eminently Russian face
evinced the ghost of a shy smile. At the same time, it was a
face wherein not a single feature was of a kind to remain fixed
in the memory, a face as vacant as though nature had forgotten
to stamp thereon a single wish. Hence, even when the woman smiled
there seemed to remain a doubt whether the smile had really
materialised.

"How is Natalia Vasilievna?" continued Gubin.

"Much as usual," the woman answered softly.

Whereafter hesitantly, and with downcast eyes, she essayed to
cross the courtyard. As she passed me I caught a whiff of
raspberries and currants.

Disappearing into the grey mist through a small door with iron
staples, she soon reissued thence with a hencoop, and, seating
herself on the steps of the doorway, and setting the coop on her
knees, took between her two large palms some fluttering,
chirping, downy, golden chicks, and raised them to her ruddy
lips and cheeks with a murmur of:

"0h my little darlings! 0h my little darlings!"

And in her voice, somehow, there was a note as of intoxication,
of abandonment. Meanwhile dull, reddish sunbeams were beginning
to peer through the fence, and to warm the long, pointed staples
with which it was fastened together. While in a stream of water
that was dripping from the eaves, and trickling over the floor
of the court, and around the woman's feet, a single beam was
bathing and quivering as though it would fain effect an advance
to the woman's lap and the hencoop, and, with the soft, downy
chicks, enjoy the caresses of the woman's bare white arms.

"Ah, little things!" again she murmured. "Ah, little children
of mine!"

Upon that Gubin suddenly desisted from his task of hauling up
the bucket, and, as he steadied the rope with his arms raised
above his head, said quickly:

"Nadezhda Ivanovna, you ought indeed to have had some
children--six at the least! "

Yet no reply came, nor did the woman even look at him.

The rays of the sun were now spreading, smokelike and
greyish-yellow, over the silver river. Above the river's calm
bed a muslin texture of mist was coiling. Against the nebulous
heavens the blue of the forest was rearing itself amid the
fragrant, pungent fumes from the burning timber.

Yet still asleep amid its sheltering half-circle of forest was
the quiet little town of Miamlin, while behind it, and
encompassing it as with a pair of dark wings, the forest in
question looked as though it were ruffling its feathers in
preparation for further flight beyond the point where, the
peaceful Oka reached, the trees stood darkening, overshadowing
the water's clear depths, and looking at themselves therein.

Yet, though the hour was so early, everything seemed to have
about it an air of sadness, a mien as though the day lacked
promise, as though its face were veiled and mournful, as though,
not yet come to birth, it nevertheless were feeling weary in
advance.

Seating myself by Gubin on some trampled straw in the hut
ordinarily used by the watchman of the Birkins' extensive
orchard, I found that, owing to the orchard being set on a
hillside, I could see over the tops of the apple and pear and
fig trees, where their tops hung bespangled with dew as with
quicksilver, and view the whole town and its multicoloured
churches, yellow, newly-painted prison, and yellow-painted bank.

And while in the town's lurid, four-square buildings I could
trace a certain resemblance to the aces of clubs stamped upon
convicts' backs, in the grey strips of the streets I could trace
a certain resemblance to a number of rents in an old, ragged,
faded, dusty coat. Indeed, that morning all comparisons seemed
to take on a tinge of melancholy; the reason being that
throughout the previous evening there had been moaning in my
soul a mournful dirge on the future life.

With nothing, however, were the churches of the town of which I
am speaking exactly comparable, for many of them had attained a
degree of beauty the contemplation of which caused the town to
assume throughout-- a different, a more pleasing and seductive,
aspect. Thought I to myself: "Would that men had fashioned all
other buildings in the town as the churches have been fashioned!"

One of the latter, an old, squat edifice the blank windows of
which were deeply sunken in the stuccoed walls, was known as the
"Prince's Church," for the reason that it enshrined the remains
of a local Prince and his wife, persons of whom it stood
recorded that "they did pass all their lives in kindly,
unchanging love." . . .

The following night Gubin and I chanced to see Peter Birkin's
tall, pale, timid young wife traverse the garden on her way to a
tryst in the washhouse with her lover, the precentor of the
Prince's Church. And as clad in a simple gown, and
barefooted, and having her ample shoulders swathed in an
old, gold jacket or shawl of some sort, she crossed the orchard
by a path running between two lines of apple trees; she walked
with the unhasting gait of a cat which is crossing a yard after
a shower of rain, and from time to time, whenever a puddle is
encountered, lifts and shakes fastidiously one of its soft paws.
Probably, in the woman's case, this came of the fact that things
kept pricking and tickling her soles as she proceeded. Also, her
knees, I could see, were trembling, and her step had in it a
certain hesitancy, a certain lack of assurance.

Meanwhile, bending over the garden from the warm night sky, the
moon's kindly visage, though on the wane, was shining brightly;
and when the woman emerged from the shadow of the trees I could
discern the dark patches of her eyes, her rounded, half-parted
lips, and the thick plait of hair which lay across her bosom.
Also, in the moonlight her bodice had assumed a bluish tinge, so
that she looked almost phantasmal; and when soundlessly, moving
as though on air, she stepped back into the shadow of the trees,
that shadow seemed to lighten.

All this happened at midnight, or thereabouts, but neither of us
was yet asleep, owing to the fact that Gubin had been telling me
some interesting stories concerning the town and its families
and inhabitants. However, as soon as he descried the woman
looming like a ghost, he leapt to his feet in comical terror,then
subsided on to the straw again, contracted his body as though he
were in convulsions, and hurriedly made the sign of the cross.

"Oh Jesus our Lord!" he gasped. "Tell me what that is, tell me
what that is!"

"Keep quiet, you," I urged.

Instead, lurching in my direction, he nudged me with his arm,

"Is it Nadezhda, think you?" he whispered.

"It is."

"Phew! The scene seems like a dream. Just in the same way, and
in the very same place, did her mother-in-law, Petrushka's
stepmother, use to come and walk. Yes, it was just like this."

Then, rolling over, face downwards, he broke into subdued,
malicious chuckles; whereafter, seizing my hand and sawing it up
and down, he whispered amid his exultant pants:

"I expect Petrushka is asleep, for probably he has taken too
much liquor at the Bassanov's smotrini. [A festival at which a
fiance pays his first visit to the house of the parents of his
betrothed.]  Aye, he will be asleep. And as for Jonah, HE will
have gone to Vaska Klochi. So tonight, until morning, Nadezhda
will be able to kick up her heels to her heart's content."

I too had begun to surmise that the woman was come thither for
purposes of her own. Yet the scene was almost dreamlike in its
beauty. It thrilled me to the soul to watch how the woman's blue
eyes gazed about her--gazed as though she were ardently,
caressingly whispering to all living creatures, asleep or awake:

"0h my darlings! 0h my darlings!"

Beside me the uncouth, broken-down Gubin went on in hoarse
accents:

"You must know that she is Petrushka's THIRD wife, a woman whom
he took to himself from the family of a merchant of Murom. Yet
the town has it that not only Petrushka, but also Jonah, makes
use of her--that she acts as wife to both brothers, and therefore
lacks children. Also has it been said of her that one Trinity
Sunday she was seen by a party of women to misconduct herself in
this garden with a police sergeant, and then to sit on his lap
and weep. Yet this last I do not wholly believe, for the
sergeant in question is a veteran scarcely able to put one foot
before the other. Also, Jonah, though a brute, lives in abject
fear of his stepmother."

Here a worm-eaten apple fell to the ground, and the woman
paused; whereafter, with head a little raised, she resumed her
way with greater speed.

As for Gubin, he continued, unchecked, though with a trifle less
animosity, rather as though he were reading aloud a manuscript
which he found wearisome:

"See how a man like Peter Birkin may pride himself upon his
wealth, and receive honour during his lifetime, yet all the
while have the devil grinning over his shoulder!"

Then he, Gubin, kept silent awhile, and merely breathed
heavily, and twisted his body about. But suddenly, he resumed in
a strange whisper:

"Fifteen years ago--no, surely it was longer ago than that?
--Madame Nadkin, Nadezhda's mother-in-law, made it her practice
to come to this spot to meet her lover. And a fine gallant HE
was!"

Somehow, as I watched the woman creeping along, and looking as
though she were intending to commit a theft, or as though she
fancied that at any moment she might see the plump brothers
Birkin issue from the courtyard into the garden and come
shuffling ponderously over the darkened ground, with ropes and
cudgels grasped in coarse, red hands which knew no pity;
somehow, as I watched her, I felt saddened, and paid little heed
to Gubin's whispered remarks, so intently were my eyes fixed
upon the granary wall as, after gliding along it awhile, the
woman bent her head and disappeared through the dark blue of the
washhouse door. As for Gubin, he went to sleep with a last
drowsy remark of:

"Life is all falsity. Husbands, wives, fathers, children--all of
them practise deceit."

In the east, portions of the sky were turning to light purple,
and other portions to a darker hue, while from time to time I
could see, looming black against those portions, coils of smoke
the density of which kept being stabbed with fiery spikes of
flame, so that the vague, towering forest looked like a hill on
the top of which a fiery dragon was crawling about, and
writhing, and intermittently raising tremulous, scarlet wings,
and as often relapsing into, becoming submerged in, the bank
of vapour. And, in contemplating the spectacle, I seemed
actually to be able to hear the cruel, hissing din of combat
between red and black, and to see pale, frightened rabbits
scudding from underneath the roots of trees amid showers of
sparks, and panting, half-suffocated birds fluttering wildly
amid the branches as further and further afield, and more and
more triumphantly, the scarlet dragon unfurled its wings, and
consumed the darkness, and devoured the rain-soaked timber.

Presently from the dark, blurred doorway in the wall of the
washhouse there emerged a dark figure which went flitting away
among the trees, while after it someone called in a sharp,
incisive whisper:

"Do not forget. You MUST come."

"Oh, I shall be only too glad!"

"Very well. In the morning the lame woman shall call upon you.
Do you hear?"

And as the woman disappeared from view the other person
sauntered across the garden, and scaled the fence with a clatter.

That night I could not sleep, but, until dawn, lay watching the
burning forest as gradually the weary moon declined, and the
lamp of Venus, cold and green as an emerald, came into view over
the crosses on the Prince's Church. Indeed was the latter a
fitting place for Venus to illumine if really it had been the
case that the Prince and Princess had "passed their lives in
kindly, unchanging love"!

Gradually, the dew cleared the trees of the night darkness, and
caused the damp, grey foliage to smile once more with aniseed
and red raspberry, and to sparkle with the gold of their mildew.
Also, there came hovering about us goldfinches with their little
red-hooded crests, and fussy tomtits in their cravats of yellow,
while a nimble,dark, blue woodpecker scaled the stem of an
apple tree. And everywhere, yellow leaves fluttered to earth,
and, in doing so, so closely resembled birds as to make it not
always easy to distinguish whether a leaf or a tomtit had
glimmered for a moment in the air.

Gubin awoke, sighed, and with his gnarled knuckles gave his
puffy eyes a rub. Then he raised himself upon all-fours, and,
crawling, much dishevelled with sleep, out of the watchman's
hut, snuffed the air (a process in which his movements
approximated comically to those of a keen-nosed watch-dog).
Finally he rose to his feet, and, in the act, shook one of the
trees so violently as to cause a bough to shed its burden of
ripe fruit, and disperse the apples hither and thither over the
dry surface of the ground, or cause them to bury themselves
among the long grass. Three of the juiciest apples he duly
recovered, and, after examination of their exterior, probed with
his teeth, while kicking away from him as many of the remainder
as he could descry.

"Why spoil those apples?" I queried

"Oh, so you are NOT asleep?" he countered with a nod of his
melon-shaped cranium. "As a matter of fact, a few apples won't
be missed, for there are too many of them about. My own father
it was that planted the trees which have grown them."

Then, turning upon me a keen, good-humoured eye, and chuckling,
he added:

"What about that Nadezhda? Ah, she is a clever woman indeed!
Yet I have a surprise in store for her and her lover."

"Why should you have?"

"Because I desire to benefit mankind at large" (this was said
didactically, and with a frown). "For, no matter where I detect
evil or underhandedness, it is my duty-- I feel it to be my duty--
to expose that evil, and to lay it bare. There exist people who
need to be taught a lesson, and to whom I long to cry: 'Sinners
that you are, do you lead more righteous lives!'"

From behind some clouds the sun was rising with a disk as murky
and mournful as the face of an ailing child. It was as though he
were feeling conscious that he had done amiss in so long
delaying to shed light upon the world, in so long dallying on
his bed of soft clouds amid the smoke of the forest fire. But
gradually the cheering beams suffused the garden throughout, and
evoked from the ripening fruit an intoxicating wave of scent in
which there could be distinguished also the bracing breath of
autumn.

Simultaneously there rose into the sky, in the wake of the sun,
a dense stratum of cloud which, blue and snow-white in colour,
lay with its soft hummocks reflected in the calm Oka, and so
wrought therein a secondary firmament as profound and impalpable
as its original.

"Now then, Makar!" was Gubin's command, and once more I posted
myself at the bottom of the well. About three sazheni in depth,
and lined with cold, damp mud to above the level of my middle,
the orifice was charged with a stifling odour both of rotten
wood and of something more intolerable still. Also, whenever I
had filled the pail with mud, and then emptied it into the
bucket and shouted "Right away!" the bucket would start
swinging against my person and bumping it, as unwillingly it
went aloft, and thereafter discharge upon my head and shoulders
clots of filth and drippings of water--meanwhile screening, with
its circular bottom, the glowing sun and now scarce visible
stars. In passing, the spectacle of those stars' waning both
pained and cheered me, for it meant that for a companion in the
firmament they now had the sun. Hence it was until my neck felt
almost fractured, and my spine and the nape of my neck were
aching as though clamped in a cast of plaster of paris, that I
kept my eyes turned aloft. Yes, anything to gain a sight of the
stars! From them I could not remove my vision, for they seemed
to exhibit the heavens in a new guise, and to convey to me the
joyful tidings that in the sky there was present also the sun.

Yet though, meanwhile, I tried to ponder on something great, I
never failed to find myself cherishing the absurd, obstinate
apprehension that soon the Birkins would leave their beds, enter
the courtyard, and have Nadezhda betrayed to them by Gubin.

And throughout there kept descending to me from above the
latter's inarticulate, as it were damp-sodden, observations.

"Another rat!" I heard him exclaim. "To think that those two
fellows, men of money, should neglect for two whole years to
clean out their well! Why, what can the brutes have been
drinking meanwhile? Look out below, you!"

And once more, with a creaking of the pulley, the bucket would
descend--bumping and thudding against the lining of the well as
it did so, and bespattering afresh my head and shoulders with
its filth. Rightly speaking, the Birkins ought to have cleared
out the well themselves!

"Let us exchange places," I cried at length.

"What is wrong?" inquired Gubin in response

"Down here it is cold--I can't stand it any longer."

"Gee up!" exclaimed Gubin to the old horse which supplied the
leverage power for the bucket; whereupon I seated myself upon
the edge of the receptacle and went aloft, where everything was
looking so bright and warm as to bear a new and unwontedly
pleasing appearance.

So now it was Gubin's turn to stand at the bottom of the well.
And soon, in addition to the odour of decay, and a subdued sound
of splashing, and the rumblings and bumpings of the iron bucket
against its chain, there began to come up from the damp, black
cavity a perfect stream of curses.

"The infernal skinflints!" I heard my companion exclaim.

"Hullo, here is something! A dog or a baby, eh? The damned old
barbarians!"

And the bucket ascended with, among its contents, a sodden and
most ancient hat. With the passage of time Gubin's temper grew
worse and worse.

"If I SHOULD find a baby here," next he exclaimed, "I shall
report the matter to the police, and get those blessed old
brothers into trouble."

Each movement of the leathern-hided, wall-eyed steed which did
our bidding was accompanied by a swishing of a sandy tail which
had for its object the brushing away of autumn's harbingers, the
bluebottles. Almost with the tranquil gait of a religious did
the animal accomplish its periodical journeys from the wall to
the entrance gates and back again; after which it always heaved
a profound sigh, and stood with its bony crest lowered.

Presently, from a corner of the yard that lay screened behind
some rank, pale, withered, trampled herbage a door screeched.
Into the yard there issued Nadezhda Birkin, carrying a bunch
of keys, and followed by a lady who, elderly and rotund of
figure, had a few dark hairs growing on her full and rather
haughty upper lip. As the two walked towards the cellar
(Nadezhda being clad only in an under-petticoat, with a chemise
half-covering her shoulders, and slippers thrust on to bare
feet), I perceived from the languor of the younger woman's gait
that she was feeling weary indeed.

"Why do you look at us like that?" her senior inquired of me
as she drew level. And as she did so the eyes that peered at me
from above the full and, somehow, displaced-looking cheeks bid
in them a dim, misty, half-blind expression.

"That must be Peter Birkin's mother-in-law," was my unspoken
reflection.

At the door of the cellar Nadezhda handed the keys to her
companion, and with a slow step which set her ample bosom
swaying, and increased the disarray of the bodice on her round,
but broad, shoulders, approached myself, and said quietly:

"Please open the gutter-sluice and let out the water into the
street, or the yard will soon be flooded. Oh, the smell of it!
What is that thing there? A rat? Oh batinshka, what a horrible
mess!"

Her face had about it a drawn look, and under her eyes there
were a pair of dark patches, and in their depths the dry glitter
of a person who has spent a night of waking. True, it was a face
still fresh of hue; yet beads of sweat were standing on the
forehead, and her shoulders looked grey and heavy--as grey and
heavy as unleavened bread which the fire has coated with a thin
crust, yet failed to bake throughout.

"Please, also, open the wicket," she continued. "And, in case
a lame old beggar-woman should call, come and tell me. I am the
Nadezhda Ivanovna for whom she will inquire. Do you understand?"

From the well, at this point, there issued the words:

"Who is that speaking?"

"It is the mistress," I replied.

"What? Nadezhda? With her I have a bone to pick."

"What did he say?" the woman asked tensely as she raised her
dark, thinly pencilled brows, and made as though to go and lean
over the well. Independently of my own volition I forestalled
what Gubin might next have been going to say by remarking:

"I must tell you that last night he saw you walking in the
garden here."

"Indeed? " she ejaculated, and drew herself to her full height.
Yet in doing so she blushed to her shoulders, and, clapping
plump hands to her bosom, and opening dark eyes to their
fullest, said in a hasty and confused whisper as, again paling
and shrinking in stature, she subsided like a piece of pastry
that is turning heavy:

"Good Lord! WHAT did he see? . . . If the lame woman should
call, you must not admit her. No, tell her that she will not be
wanted, that I cannot, that I must not--But see here. Here is a
rouble for you. Oh, good Lord!"

By this time even louder and more angry exclamations had begun
to ascend from Gubin. Yet the only sound to reach my ears was
the woman's muttered whispering, and as I glanced into her face
I perceived that its hitherto high-coloured and rounded contours
had fallen in, and turned grey, and that her flushed lips were
trembling to such an extent as almost to prevent the
articulation of her words. Lastly, her eyes were frozen into an
expression of pitiful, doglike terror.

Suddenly she shrugged her shoulders, straightened her form, put
away from her the expression of terror, and said quietly, but
incisively:

"You will not need to say anything about this. Allow me."

And with a swaying step she departed--a step so short as almost
to convey the impression that her legs were bound together. Yet
while the gait was the gait of a person full of suppressed fury,
it was also the gait of a person who can scarcely see an inch in
advance.

"Haul away, you!" shouted Gubin.

I hauled him up in a state of cold and wet; whereafter he fell
to stamping around the coping of the well, cursing, and waving
his arms.

"What have you been thinking of all this time?" he
vociferated. "Why, for ever so long I shouted and shouted to
you!"

"I have been telling Nadezhda that last night you saw her
walking in the garden."

He sprang towards me with a vicious scowl.

"Who gave you leave to do so?" he exclaimed.

"Wait a moment. I said that it was only in a dream, that you
saw her crossing the garden to the washhouse."

"Indeed? And why did you do that? "

Somehow, as, barelegged and dripping with mud, he stood
blinking his eyes at me with a most disagreeable expression, he
looked extremely comical.

"See here," I remarked, "you have only to go and tell her
husband about her for me to go and tell him the same story about
your having seen the whole thing in a dream."

"Why?" cried Gubin, now almost beside himself. Presently, however, he
recovered sufficient self-possession to grin and ask in an
undertone:

"HOW MUCH DID SHE GIVE YOU?"

I explained to him that my sole reason for what I had done had
been that I pitied the woman, and feared lest the brothers
Birkin should do an injury to one who at least ought not to be
betrayed. Gubin began by declining to believe me, but
eventually, after the matter had been thought out, said:

"Acceptance of money for doing what is right is certainly
irregular; but at least is it better than acceptance of money
for conniving at sin. Well, you have spoilt my scheme, young
fellow. Hired only to clean out the well, I would nevertheless
have cleaned out the establishment as a whole, and taken
pleasure in doing so."

Then once more he relapsed into fury, and muttered as he
scurried round and round the well:

"How DARED you poke your nose into other people's affairs? Who
are YOU in this establishment?"

The air was hot and arid, yet still the sky was as dull as
though coated throughout with the dust of summer, and, as yet,
one could gaze at the sun's purple, rayless orb without
blinking, and as easily as one could have gazed at the glowing
embers of a wood fire.

Seated on the fence, a number of rooks were directing
intelligent black eyes upon the heaps of mud which lay around
the coping of the well. And from time to time they fluttered
their wings impatiently, and cawed.

"I got you some work," Gubin continued in a grumbling tone,
"and put heart into you with the prospect of employment. And now
you have gone and treated me like --"

At this point I caught the sound of a horse trotting towards the
entrance-gates, and heard someone shout, as the animal drew
level with the house:

"YOUR timber too has caught alight!"

Instantly, frightened by the shout, the rooks took to their
wings and flew away. Also, a window sash squeaked, and the
courtyard resounded with sudden bustle--the culinary regions
vomiting the elderly lady and the tousled, half-clad Jonah; and
an open window the upper half of the red-headed Peter.

"Men, harness up as quickly as possible!" the latter cried,
his voice charged with a plaintive note.

And, indeed, he had hardly spoken before Gubin led out a fat
roan pony, and Jonah pulled from a shelter a light buggy or
britchka. Meanwhile Nadezhda called from the veranda to Jonah:

"Do you first go in and dress yourself! "

The elderly lady then unfastened the gates; whereupon a stunted,
oldish muzhik in a red shirt limped into the yard with a
foam-flecked steed, and exclaimed:

"It is caught in two places--at the Savelkin clearing and near
the cemetery!"

Immediately the company pressed around him with groans and
ejaculations, and Gubin alone continued to harness the pony with
swift and dexterous hands--saying to me through his teeth as he
did so, and without looking at anyone:

"That is how those wretched folk ALWAYS defer things until too
late."

The next person to present herself at the entrance gates was a
beggar-woman. Screwing up her eyes in a furtive manner, she
droned:

"For the sake of Lord Je-e-esus!"

"God will give you alms! God will give you alms!" was
Nadezhda's reply as, turning pale, she flung out her arms in the
old woman's direction. "You see, a terrible thing has happened
--our timber lands have caught fire. You must come again later."

Upon that Peter's bulky form (which had entirely filled the
window from which it had been leaning), disappeared with a jerk,
and in its stead there came into view the figure of a woman.
Said she contemptuously:

"See the visitation with which God has tried us, you men of
faint hearts and indolent hands!"

The woman's hair was grey at the temples, and had resting upon
it a silken cap which so kept changing colour in the sunlight as
to convey to one. the impression that her head was bonneted with
steel, while in her face, picturesque but dark (seemingly
blackened with smoke), there gleamed two pupil-less blue eyes of
a kind which I had never before beheld.

"Fools," she continued, "how often have I not pointed out to
you the necessity of cutting a wider space between the timber
and the cemetery?"

From a furrow above the woman's small but prominent nose, a
pair of heavy brows extended to temples that were silvered over.
As she spoke there fell a strange silence amid which save for
the pony's pawing of the mire no sound mingled with the
sarcastic reproaches of the deep, almost masculine voice.

"That again is the mother-in-law," was my inward reflection.

Gubin finished the harnessing--then said to Jonah in the tone of
a superior addressing a servant:

"Go in and dress yourself, you object!"

Nevertheless, the Birkins drove out of the yard precisely as they
were, while the peasant mounted his belathered steed and
followed them at a trot; and the elderly lady disappeared from
the window, leaving its panes even darker and blacker than they
had previously been. Gubin, slip-slopping through the puddles
with bare feet, said to me with a sharp glance as he moved to
shut the entrance gates:

"I presume that I can now take in hand the little affair of
which you know."

"Yakov!" at this juncture someone shouted from the house.

Gubin straightened himself a la militaire.

"Yes, I am coming," he replied.

Whereafter, padding on bare soles, he ascended the steps.
Nadezhda, standing at their top, turned away with a frown of
repulsion at his approach, and nodded and beckoned to myself,

"What has Yakov said to you? " she inquired

"He has been reproaching me."

"Reproaching you for what?"

"For having spoken to you."

She heaved a sigh.

"Ah, the mischief-maker!" she exclaimed. "And what is it that
he wants?"

As she pouted her displeasure her round and vacant face looked
almost childlike.

"Good Lord!" she added. "What DO such men as he want?"

Meanwhile the heavens were becoming overspread with dark grey
clouds, and presaging a flood of autumn rain, while from the
window near the steps the voice of Peter's mother-in-law was
issuing in a steady stream. At first, however, nothing was
distinguishable save a sound like the humming of a spindle.

"It is my mother that is speaking," Nadezhda explained softly.
"She'll give it him! Yes, SHE will protect me!"

Yet I scarcely heard Nadezhda's words, so greatly was I feeling
struck with the quiet forcefulness, the absolute assurance, of
what was being said within the window.

"Enough, enough! " said the voice. "Only through lack of
occupation have you joined the company of the righteous."

Upon this I made a move to approach closer to the window;
whereupon Nadezhda whispered:

"Whither are you going? You must not listen."

While she was yet speaking I heard come from the window:

"Similarly your revolt against mankind has come of idleness, of
lack of an interest in life. To you the world has been
wearisome, so, while devising this revolt as a resource, you
have excused it on the ground of service of God and love of
equity, while in reality constituting yourself the devil's
workman."

Here Nadezhda plucked at my sleeve, and tried to pull me away,
but I remarked:

"I MUST learn what Gubin has got to say in answer."

This made Nadezhda smile, and then whisper with a confiding
glance at my face:

"You see, I have made a full confession to her. I went and said
to her: 'Mamenka, I have had a misfortune.' And her only reply
as she stroked my hair was, 'Ah, little fool! ' Thus you see
that she pities me. And what makes her care the less that I
should stray in that direction is that she yearns for me to bear
her a child, a grandchild, as an heir to her property."

Next, Gubin was heard saying within the room:

"Whensoever an offence is done against the law I..."

At once a stream of impressive words from the other drowned his
utterance:

"An offence is not always an offence of moment, since sometimes
a person outgrows the law, and finds it too restrictive. No one
person ought to be rated against another. For whom alone ought
we to fear? Only the God in whose sight all of us have erred!"

And though in the elderly lady's voice there was weariness and
distaste, the words were spoken slowly and incisively. Upon this
Gubin tried to murmur something or another, but again his
utterance failed to edge its way into his interlocutor's
measured periods:

"No great achievement is it," she said, "to condemn a fellow
creature. For always it is easy to sit in judgment upon our
fellows. And even if a fellow creature be allowed to pursue an
evil course unchecked, his offence may yet prove productive of
good. Remember how in every case the Saints reached God. Yet how
truly sanctified, by the time that they did so reach Him, were
they? Let this ever be borne in mind, for we are over-apt to
condemn and punish!"

"In former days, Natalia Vassilievna, you took away from me my
substance, you took my all. Also, let me recount to you how we
fell into disagreement."

"No; there is no need for that."

"Thereafter, I ceased to be able to bear the contemplation of
myself; I ceased to consider myself as of any value."

"Let the past remain the past. That which must be is not to be
avoided."

"Through you, I say, I lost my peace of mind."

Nadezhda nudged me, and whispered with gay malice:

"That is probably true, for they say that once he was one of
her lovers."

Then she recollected herself and, clapping her hands to her
face, cried through her fingers:

"Oh good Lord! What have I said? No, no, you must not believe
these tales. They are only slanders, for she is the best of
women."

"When evil has been done," continued the quiet voice within the
window, "it can never be set right by recounting it to others.
He upon whom a burden has been laid should try to bear it. And,
should he fail to bear it, the fact will mean that the burden
has been beyond his strength."

"It was through you that I lost everything. It was you that
stripped me bare."

"But to that which you lost I added movement. Nothing in life
is ever lost; it merely passes from one hand to another--from
the unskilled hand to the experienced-- so that even the bone
picked of a dog may ultimately become of value."

"Yes, a bone--that is what I am."

"Why should you say that? You are still a man."

"Yes, a man, but a man useful for what?"

"Useful, even though the use may not yet be fully apparent."

To this, after a pause, the speaker added:

"Now, depart in peace, and make no further attempt against this
woman. Nay, do not even speak ill of her if you can help it, but
consider everything that you saw to have been seen in a dream."

"Ah!" was Gubin's contrite cry. "It shall be as you say. Yet,
though I should hate, I could not bear, to grieve you, I must
confess that the height whereon you stand is--"

"Is what, 0h friend of mine?"

"Nothing; save that of all souls in this world you are, without
exception, the best."

"Yakov Petrovitch, in this world you and I might have ended our
lives together in honourable partnership. And even now, if God
be willing, we might do so."

"No. Rather must farewell be said."

All became quiet within the window, except that after a
prolonged silence there came from the woman a deep sigh, and
then a whisper of, "0h Lord!"

Treading softly, like a cat, Nadezhda darted away towards the
steps; whereas I, less fortunate, was caught by the departing
Gubin in the very act of leaving the neighbourhood of the
window. Upon that he inflated his cheeks, ruffled up his sandy
hair, turned red in the face like a man who has been through a
fight, and cried in strange, querulous, high-pitched accents:

"Hi! What were you doing just now? Long-legged devil that you
are, I have no further use for you--I do not intend to work with
you any more. So you can go."

At the same moment the dim face, with its great blue eyes,
showed itself at the window, and the stem voice inquired:

"What does the noise mean?"

"What does it mean? It means that I do not intend--"

"You must not, if you wish to create a disturbance, do it
anywhere but in the street. It must not be created here."

"What is all this? " Nadezhda put in with a stamp of her foot.
"What--"

At this point, the cook rushed out with a toasting-fork and
militantly ranged herself by Nadezhda's side, exclaiming:

"See what comes of not having a single muzhik in the house!"

I now prepared to withdraw, but, in doing so, glanced once more
at the features of the elderly lady, and saw that the blue
pupils were dilated so as almost to fill the eyes in their
entirety, and to leave only a bluish margin. And strange and
painful were those eyes--eyes fixed blindly, eyes which seemed to
have strayed from their orbits through yielding to emotion and a
consequent overstrain-- while the apple of the throat had swelled
like the crop of a bird, and the sheen of the silken head-dress
become as the sheen of metal. Involuntarily, I thought to myself:

"It is a head that must be made of iron."

By this time Gubin had penitently subsided, and was exchanging
harmless remarks with the cook, while carefully avoiding my
glance.

"Good day to you, madame," at length I said as I passed the
window.

Not at once did she reply, but when she did so she said kindly:

"And good day to YOU, my friend. Yes, I wish you good day."

To which she added an inclination of the head which resembled
nothing so much as a hammer which much percussion upon an anvil
has wrought to a fine polish.



NILUSHKA

The timber-built town of Buev, a town which has several times
been burnt to the ground, lies huddled upon a hillock above the
river Obericha. Its houses, with their many-coloured shutters,
stand so crowded together as to form around the churches and
gloomy law courts a perfect maze--the streets which intersect the
dark masses of houses meandering aimlessly hither and thither,
and throwing off alleyways as narrow as sleeves, and feeling
their way along plot-fences and warehouse walls, until, viewed
from the hillock above, the town looks as though someone has
stirred it up with a stick and dispersed and confused everything
that it contains. Only from the point where Great Zhitnaia
Street takes its rise from the river do the stone mansions of
the local merchants (for the most part German colonists) cut a
grim, direct line through the packed clusters of buildings
constructed of wood, and skirt the green islands of gardens, and
thrust aside the churches; whereafter, continuing its way
through Council Square (still running inexorably straight), the
thoroughfare stretches to, and traverses, a barren plain of
scrub, and so reaches the pine plantation belonging to the
Monastery of St. Michael the Archangel where the latter is
lurking behind a screen of old red spruces of which the
denseness seems to prop the very heavens, and which on clear,
sunny days can be seen rising to mark the spot whence the
monastery's crosses, like the gilded birds of the forest of
eternal silence, scintillate a constant welcome.

At a distance of some ten houses before Zhitnaia Street
debouches upon the plain which I have mentioned there begin to
diverge from the street and to trend towards a ravine, and
eventually to lose themselves in the latter's recesses, the
small, squat shanties with one or two windows apiece which
constitute the suburb of Tolmachikha. This suburb, it may be
said, had as its original founders the menials of a landowner
named Tolmachev--a landowner who, after emancipating his serfs
some thirteen years before all serfs were legally emancipated,
[In the year 1861] was, for his action, visited with such
bitter revilement that, in dire offence at the same, he ended by
becoming an inmate of the monastery, and there spending ten
years under the vow of silence, until death overtook him amid a
peaceful obscurity born of the fact that the authorities had
forbidden his exhibition to pilgrims or strangers.

It is in the very cots originally apportioned to Tolmachev's
menials, at the time, fifty years ago, when those menials were
converted into citizens, that the present inhabitants of the
suburb dwell. And never have they been burnt out of those homes,
although the same period has seen all Buev save Zhitnaia Street
consumed, and everywhere that one may delve within the township
one will be sure to come across undestroyed hearthstones.

The suburb, as I have said, stands at the hither end and on the
sloping side of one of the arms of a deep, wooded ravine, with
its windows facing towards the ravine's yawning mouth, and
affording a view direct to the Mokrie (certain marshes beyond
the Obericha) and the swampy forest of firs into which the dim
red sun declines. Further on, the ravine trends across the
plain,then bends round towards the western side of the town,
cats away the clayey soil with an appetite which each spring
increases, and which, carrying the soil down to the river, is
gradually clogging the river's flow, diverting the muddy
water towards the marshes, and converting those marshes into a
lagoon outright. The fissure in question is named " The Great
Ravine," and has its steep flanks so overgrown with chestnuts
and laburnums that even in summertime its recesses are cool and
moist, and so serve as a convenient trysting place for the
poorer lovers of the suburb and the town, and witness their
tea drinkings and frequently fatal quarrels, as well as being
used by the more well-to-do for a dumping ground for rubbish of
the nature of deceased dogs, cats, and horses.

Pleasantly singing, there scours the bottom of the ravine the
brook known as the Zhandarmski Spring, a brook celebrated
throughout Buev for its crystal-cold water, which is so icy of
temperature that even on a burning day it will make the teeth
ache. This water the denizens of Tolmachikha account to be their
peculiar property; wherefore they are proud of it, and drink it
to the exclusion of any other, and so live to a green old age
which in some cases cannot even reckon its years. And by way of
a livelihood, the men of the suburb indulge in hunting, fishing,
fowling, and thieving (not a single artisan proper does the
suburb contain, save the cobbler Gorkov--a thin, consumptive
skeleton of surname Tchulan); while, as regards the women, they,
in winter, sew and make sacks for Zimmel's mill, and pull tow,
and in summer they scour the plantation of the monastery for
truffles and other produce, and the forest on the other side of
the river for huckleberries. Also, two of the suburb's women
practise as fortune tellers, while two others conduct an easy
and highly lucrative trade in prostitution.

The result is that the town, as distinguished from the suburb,
believes the men of the latter to be one and all thieves, and
the women and girls of the suburb to be one and all disreputable
characters. Hence the town strives always to restrict and
extirpate the suburb, while the suburbans retaliate upon the
townsfolk with robbery and arson and murder, while despising
those townsfolk for their parsimony, decorum, and avarice, and
detesting the settled, comfortable mode of life which they lead.

So poor, for that matter, is the suburb that never do even
beggars resort thither, save when drunk. No, the only creatures
which resort thither are dogs which subsist no one knows how as
predatorily they roam from court to court with tails tucked
between their flanks, and bloodless tongues hanging down, and
legs ever prepared, on sighting a human being, to bolt into the
ravine, or to let down their owners upon subservient bellies in
expectation of a probable kick or curse.

In short, every cranny of every cot in the place, with the grimy
panes of their windows, and their lathed roofs overgrown with
velvety moss, breathes forth the universal, deadly hopelessness
induced by Russia's crushing poverty.

In the Tolmachikhans' backyards grow only alders, elders, and
weeds. Everywhere docks thrust up heads through cracks in the
fences to catch at the legs or the skirts of passers-by, while
masses of nettles squeeze their way under fences to sting little
children. Apropos, the latter are all thin and hungry, in the
highest degree quarrelsome, and addicted to prolonged
lamentation. Also, each spring sees a certain proportion of
their number carried off by diphtheria, while scarlatina and
measles are as epidemic among them as is typhoid among their
elders.

Thus the sounds of life most to be heard throughout the suburb
are the sounds either of weeping or of mad cursing. In general,
however, life in Tolmachikha is lived quietly and lethargically.
So much is this the case that in spring even the cats forbear to
squall save in crushed and subdued accents. The only local
person to sing is Felitzata; and even she does so only when she
is drunk. It may be said that Felitzata is a saucy, cunning
procuress, and does her singing in a peculiarly thick and
rasping voice which, with many croaks and hiatuses, necessitates
much closing of the eyes, and a great protruding of the apple of
the throat. Indeed, it is only the women of the place who,
turbulently quarrelsome and hysterically noisy, spend most of
the day in scouring the streets with skirts tucked up, and never
cease begging for pinches of salt or flour or spoonfuls of oil
as they rail and screech at and beat their children, and thrust
withered breasts into their babies' mouths, and rush and fling
themselves about, and bawl in a constant endeavour to right
their woebegone condition. Yes, all are dishevelled and dirty,
and have wizened, bony faces, and the restless eyes of thieves.
Never, indeed, is a woman plump of figure, save at the period
when she is ill, and her eyes are dim, and her gait is laboured.
Yet until they are forty, the majority of the women become
pregnant with every winter, and on the arrival of spring may be
seen walking abroad with large stomachs and blue hollows under
the eyes. And even this does not prevent them from working with
the same desperate energy as when they are not with child. In
short, the inhabitants of the place resemble needles and threads
with which some rough, clumsy, and impatient hand is for ever
trying to darn a ragged cloth which as constantly parts and
rends.

**********************

The chief person of repute in the suburb is my landlord, one
Antipa Vologonov--a little old man who keeps a shop of "odd
wares," and also lends money on pledge.

Unfortunately, Antipa is a sufferer from a long-standing tendency
to rheumatism, which has left him bow-legged, and has twisted and
swollen his fingers to the extent that they will not bend. Hence,
he always keeps his hands tucked into his sleeves, though
seemingly he has the less use for them in that, even when he
withdraws them from their shelter, he does so as cautiously as
though he were afraid of their becoming dislocated.

On the other hand, he never loses his temper, and he never grows
excited.

"Neither of those things suits me," he will say, "for my heart
is dilated, and might at any moment fail."

As for his face, it has high cheekbones which in places blossom
into dark red blotches; an expression as calm as that of the
face of a Khirghiz; a chin whence dangle wisps of mingled grey,
red, and flaxen hair of a perpetually moist appearance; oblique
and ever-changing eyes which are permanently contracted; a pair
of thick, parti-coloured eyebrows which cast deep shadows over
the eyes; and temples whereon a number of blue veins struggle
with an irregular, sparse coating of bristles. Finally, about
his whole personality there is something ever variable and
intangible.

Also, his gait is irritatingly slow; and the more so owing to
his coat, which, of a cut devised by himself, consists, as it
were, of cassock, sarafan [jacket], and waistcoat in one. As
often as not he finds the skirts of the garment cumbering his
legs; whereupon he has to stop and give them a kick. And thus it
comes about that permanently the skirts are ragged and torn.

"No need for hurry," is his customary remark. "Always, in
time, does one win to one's pitch in the marketplace."

His speech is cast in rounded periods, and displays a great love
for ecclesiastical terms. On the occurrence of one such term, he
pauses thereafter as though mentally he were adding to the term
a very thick, a very black, full stop. Yet always he will
converse with anyone, and at great length--his probable motive
being a desire to leave behind him the reputation of a wise old
man.

In his shanty are three windows facing on to the street, and a
partition-wall which divides it into two rooms of unequal size.
In the larger room, which contains a Russian stove, he himself
lives; in the smaller room I have my abode. By a passage the two
are separated from a storeroom where, closeted behind a door to
which there are a heavy, old-fashioned bolt and many iron and
brass screws, Antipa preserves pledges left by his neighbours,
such as samovars, ikons, winter clothing and the like. Of this
storeroom he always carries the great indentated key at the back
of the strap which upholds his cloth breeches; and, whenever the
police call to ascertain whether he is harbouring any stolen
goods, a long time ensues whilst he is shifting the key round to
his stomach, and again a long time whilst he is unfastening it
from the belt. Meanwhile, he says pompously to the Superintendent
or the Deputy Superintendent:

"Never do I take in goods of that kind. Of the truth of what I
say, your honour, you have more than once assured yourself in
person."

Also, whenever Antipa sits down the key rattles against the back
or the seat of his chair; whereupon he bends his arm with
difficulty, and feels to see whether or not the key has come
unslung. This I know for the reason that the partition-wall is
not so thick but that I can hear his every breath drawn, and
divine his every movement.

Of an evening, when the misty sun is slanting across the river
towards the auburn belt of pines, and distilling pink vapours
from the sombre vista to be seen through the shaggy mouth of the
ravine, Antipa Vologonov sets out a squat samovar that is dinted
of side, and plated with green oxide on handle, turncock, and
spout. Then he seats himself at his table by the window.

At intervals I hear the evening stillness broken by questions
put in a tone which implies always an expectation of a precise
answer.

"Where is Darika?"

"He has gone to the spring for water." The answer is given
whiningly, and in a thin voice.

"And how is your sister?

"Still in pain."

"Yes? Well, you can go now."

Giving a slight cough to clear his throat, the old man begins to
sing in a quavering falsetto:

Once a bullet smote my breast,
And scarce the pang I felt.
But ne'er the pang could be express'd
Which love's flame since hath dealt!

As the samovar hisses and bubbles, heavy footsteps resound in the
street, and an indistinct voice says:

"He thinks that because he is a Town Councillor he is also
clever."

"Yes; such folk are apt to grow very proud."

"Why, all his brains put together wouldn't grease one of my
boots!"

And as the voices die away the old man's falsetto trickles forth
anew, humming:

"The poor man's anger... Minika! Hi, you! Come in here, and I
will give you a bit of sugar. How is your father getting on? Is
he drunk at present?"

"No, sober, for he is taking nothing but kvas and cabbage soup."

"And what is he doing for a living?"

"Sitting at the table, and thinking."

"And has your mother been beating him again?"

"No--not again."

"And she--how is she?"

"Obliged to keep indoors."

"Well, run along with you."

Softly there next presents herself before the window Felitzata,
a woman of about forty with a hawk-like gleam in her coldly
civil eyes, and a pair of handsome lips compressed into a covert
smile. She is well known throughout the suburb, and once had a
son, Nilushka, who was the local " God's fool." Also she has the
reputation of knowing what is correct procedure on all and
sundry occasions, as well as of being skilled in lamentations,
funeral rites, and festivities in connection with the musterings
of recruits. Lastly she has had a hip broken, so that she walks
with an inclination towards the left.

Her fellow women say of her that her veins contain "a drop of
gentle blood";  but probably the statement is inspired by no
more than the fact that she treats everyone with the same cold
civility. Nevertheless, there is something peculiar about her,
for her hands are slender and have long fingers, and her head
is haughtily poised, and her voice has a metallic ring, even
though the metal has, as it were, grown dull and rusty. Also,
she speaks of everyone, herself included, in the most rough and
downright terms, yet terms which are so simple that, though her
talk may be disconcerting to listen to, it could never be called
obscene.

For instance, once I overheard Vologonov reproach her for not
leading a more becoming life:

"You ought to have more self-restraint," said he, "seeing that
you are a lady, and also your own mistress."

"That is played out, my friend," she replied. "You see, I have
had very much to bear, for there was a time when such hunger
used to gnaw at my belly as you would never believe. It was then
that my eyes became dazzled with the tokens of shame. So I took
my fill of love, as does every woman. And once a woman has
become a light-o'-love she may as well doff her shift
altogether, and use the body which God has given her. And, after
all, an independent life is the best life; so I hawk myself
about like a pot of beer, and say, 'Drink of this, anyone who
likes, while it still contains liquor.'"

"It makes one feel ashamed to hear such talk," said Vologonov
with a sigh. In response she burst out laughing.

"What a virtuous man!" was her comment upon his remark.

Until now Antipa had spoken cautiously, and in an undertone,
whereas the woman had replied in loud accents of challenge.

"Will you come in and have some tea? " he said next as he leant
out of the window.

"No, I thank you. In passing, what a thing I have heard about
you!"

"Do not shout so loud. Of what are you speaking?"

"Oh, of SUCH a thing!"

"Of NOTHING, I imagine."

"Yes, of EVERYTHING."

"God, who created all things, alone knows everything."

Whereafter the pair whispered together awhile. Then Felitzata
disappeared as suddenly as she had come, leaving the old man
sitting motionless. At length he heaved a profound sigh, and
muttered to himself.

"Into that Eve's ears be there poured the poison of the asp! .
. . Yet pardon me, 0h God! Yea, pardon me!"

The words contained not a particle of genuine contrition.
Rather, I believe, he uttered them because he had a weakness not
for words which signified anything, but for words which, being
out of the way, were not used by the common folk of the suburb.

****************************

Sometimes Vologonov knocks at the partition-wall with a
superannuated arshin measure which has only fifteen vershoki of
its length remaining. He knocks, and shouts:

"Lodger, would you care to join me in a pot of tea? "

During the early days of our acquaintanceship he regarded me
with marked and constant suspicion. Clearly he deemed me to be a
police detective. But subsequently he took to scanning my face
with critical curiosity, until at length he said with an air of
imparting instruction:

"Have you ever read Paradise Lost and Destroyed?"

"No," I replied. "Only Paradise Regained."

This led him to wag his parti-coloured beard in token that 'be
disagreed with my choice', and to observe:

"The reason why Adam lost Paradise is that he allowed Eve to
corrupt him. And never did the Lord permit him to regain it. For
who is worthy to return to the gates of Paradise? Not a single
human being."

And, indeed, I found it a waste of time to dispute the matter, for
he merely listened to what I had to say, and then, without
an attempt at refutation, repeated in the same tone as before,
and exactly in the same words, his statement that " Adam lost
Paradise for the reason that he allowed Eve to corrupt him."

Similarly did women constitute our most usual subject of
conversation.

"You are young," once he said, " and therefore a human being
bound to find forbidden fruit blocking your way at every step.
This because the human race is a slave to its love of sin, or,
in other words, to love of the Serpent. Yes, woman constitutes
the prime impediment to everything in life, as history has many
times affirmed. And first and foremost is she the source of
restlessness. 'Charged with poison, the Serpent shall plunge in
thee her fangs.' Which Serpent is, of course, our desire of the
flesh, the Serpent at whose instigation the Greeks razed towns
to the ground, and ravaged Troy and Carthagena and Egypt, and
the Serpent which caused an amorous passion for the sister of
Alexander Pavlovitch [The Emperor Alexander I] to bring about
Napoleon's invasion of Russia. On the other hand, both the
Mohammedan nations and the Jews have from earliest times grasped
the matter aright, and kept their women shut up in their back
premises; whereas WE permit the foulest of profligacy to exist,
and walk hand in hand with our women, and allow them to graduate
as female doctors and to pull teeth, and all the rest of it.
The truth is that they ought not to be allowed to advance beyond
midwife, since it is woman's business either to serve as a
breeding animal or opprobriously to be called neiskusobrachnaia
neviesta [Maid who hast never tasted of marriage.] Yes, woman's
business should end there."

Near the stove there ticks and clicks on the grimy wall that is
papered with "rules and regulations " and sheets of yellow
manuscript the pendulum of a small clock, with, hanging to one
of its weights, a hammer and a horseshoe, and, to the other, a
copper pestle. Also, in a corner of the room a number of ikons
make a glittering show with their silver applique and the gilded
halos which surmount their figures' black visages, while a stove
with a ponderous grate glowers out of the window at the greenery
in Zhitnaia Street and beyond the ravine (beyond the ravine
everything looks bright and beautiful), and the dusty, dimly
lighted storeroom across the passage emits a perennial odour of
dried mushroom, tobacco leaves, and hemp oil.

Vologonov stirs his strong, stewed tea with a battered old
teaspoon, and says with a sigh as he sips a little:

"All my life I have been engaged in gaining experience so that
now I know most things, and ought to be listened to with
attention. Usually folk do so listen to me, but though here and
there one may find a living soul, of the rest it may be said: 'In
the House of David shall terrible things come to pass, and
fire shall consume the spirit of lechery.'"

The words resemble bricks in that they seem, if possible, to
increase the height of the walls of strange and extraneous
events, and even stranger dramas, which loom for ever around, me.

"For example," continues the old man, "why is Mitri Ermolaev
Polukonov, our ex-mayor, lying dead before his time? Because he
conceived a number of arrogant projects. For example, he sent
his eldest son to study at Kazan-- with the result that during
the son's second year at the University he, the son, brought
home with him a curly-headed Jewess, and said to his father:
'Without this woman I cannot live--in her are bound up my whole
soul and strength.' Yes, a pass indeed! And from that day forth
nothing but misfortune befell in that Yashka took to drink, the
Jewess gave way to repining, and Mitri had to go perambulating
the town with piteous invitations to 'come and see, my brethren,
to what depths I have sunk!' And though, eventually, the Jewess
died of a bloody flux, of a miscarriage, the past was beyond
mending, and, while the son went to the bad, and took to drink
for good and all, the father 'fell a victim by night to untimely
death.' Yes, the lives of two folk were thus undone by 'the
thorn-bearing company of Judaea.' Like ourselves, the Hebrew has
a destiny of his own. And destiny cannot be driven out with a
stick. Of each of us the destiny is unhasting. It moves slowly
and quietly, and can never be avoided. 'Wait,' it says. ' Seek
not to press onward.'"

As he discourses, Vologonov's eyes ceaselessly change colour--now
turning to a dull grey, and wearing a tired expression, and now
becoming blue, and assuming a mournful air, and now (and most
frequently of all) beginning to emit green flashes of an
impartial malevolence.

"Similarly, the Kapustins, once a powerful family, came at
length to dust-became as nothing. It was a family the members of
which were ever in favour of change, and devoted to anything
that was new. In fact, they went and set up a piano! Well, of
them only Valentine is still on his legs, and he (he is a doctor
of less than forty years of age) is a hopeless drunkard, and
saturated with dropsy, and fallen a prey to asthma, so that his
cancerous eyes protrude horribly. Yes, the Kapustins, like the
Polukonovs, may be 'written down as dead.'"

Throughout, Vologonov speaks in a tone of unassailable
conviction, in a tone implying that never could things happen,
never could things have happened, otherwise than as he has
stated. In fact, in his hands even the most inexplicable, the
most grievous, phenomena of life become such as a law has
inevitably decreed.

"And the same thing will befall the Osmukhins," he next
remarks. "Let them be a warning to you never to make friends
with Germans, and never to engage in business with them. In
Russia any housewife may brew beer; yet our people will not
drink it--they are more used to spirits. Also, Russian folk like
to attain their object in drinking AT ONCE; and a shkalik of
vodka will do more to sap wit than five kruzhki of beer. Once
our people liked uniform simplicity; but now they are
become like a man who was born blind, and has suddenly acquired
sight. A change indeed! For thirty-three years did Ilya of Murom
[Ilya Murometz, the legendary figure most frequently met with In
Russian bilini (folk songs), and probably identical with Elijah
the Prophet, though credited with many of the attributes proper,
rather, to the pagan god Perun the Thunderer.] sit waiting for
his end before it came; and all who cannot bide patiently in a
state of humility..."

Meanwhile clouds shaped like snow-white swans are traversing the
roseate heavens and disappearing into space, while below them,
on earth, the ravine can be seen spread out like the pelt of a
bear which the broad shoulders of some fabulous giant have
sloughed before taking refuge in the marshes and forest. In fact
the landscape reminds me of sundry ancient tales of marvels, as
also does Antipa Vologonov, the man who is so strangely
conversant with the shortcomings of human life, and so
passionately addicted to discussing them.

For a moment or two he remains silent as sibilantly he purses
his lips and drinks some saffron-coloured tea from the saucer
which the splayed fingers of his right hand are balancing on
their tips. Whereafter, when his wet moustache has been dried,
his level voice resumes its speech in tones as measured as those
of one reading aloud from the Psalter.

"Have you noticed a shop in Zhitnaia Street kept by an old man
named Asiev? Once that man had ten sons. Six of them, however,
died in infancy. Of the remainder the eldest, a fine singer, was
at once extravagant and a bookworm; wherefore, whilst an
officer's servant at Tashkend, he cut the throats of his master
and mistress, and for doing so was executed by shooting. As a
matter of fact, the tale has it that he had been making love to
his mistress, and then been thrown over in favour of his master
once more. And another son, Grigori, after being given a high
school education at St. Petersburg, became a lunatic. And
another, Alexei, entered the army as a cavalryman, but is now
acting as a circus rider, and probably has also become a
drunkard. And the youngest son of all, Nikolai, ran away as a
boy, and, eventually arriving in Norway with a precious scheme
for catching fish in the Arctic Ocean, met with failure through
the fact that he had overlooked the circumstance that we
Russians have fish of our own and to spare, and had to have his
interest assigned by his father to a local monastery. So much
for fish of the Arctic Seas! Yet if Nikolai had only waited, if
he had only been more patient, he--"

Here Vologonov lowers his voice, and continues with something of
the growl of an angry dog:

"I too have had sons, one of whom was killed at Kushka (a
document has certified to that effect), another was drowned
whilst drunk, three more died in infancy, and only two are still
alive. Of these last, I know that one is acting as a waiter in a
hotel at Smolensk, while the other, Melenti, was educated for
the Church, sent to study in a seminary, induced to abscond and
get into trouble, and eventually dispatched to Siberia. There
now! Yes, the Russian is what might be called a 'lightweighted'
individual, an individual who, unless he holds himself down by
the head, is soon carried off by the wind like a chicken's
feather-- for we are too self-confident and restless. Before now,
I myself have been a gull, a man lacking balance: for never does
youth realise its own insignificance, or know how to wait."

Dissertations of the kind drop from the old man like water from
a leaky pipe on a cold, blustery day in autumn. Wagging his grey
beard, he talks and talks, until I begin to think that he must
be an evil wizard, and master of this remote, barren, swampy,
ravine-pitted region--that he it is who originally planted the
town in this uncomfortable, clayey hollow, and has thrown the
houses into heaps, and entangled the streets, and wantonly
created the town's unaccountably rude and rough and deadly
existence, and addled men's brains with disconnected nonsense,
and consumed their hearts with a fear of life. Yes, it comes to
me that it must be he who, during the long six months of winter,
causes cruel snowstorms from the plain to invade the town, and
with frost compresses the buildings of the town until their
rafters crack, and stinging cold brings birds to the ground.
Lastly, I become seized with the idea that it must be he who,
almost every summer, envelops the town in those terrible
visitations of heat by night which seem almost to cause the
houses to melt.

However, as a rule he maintains complete silence, and merely
makes chewing motions with his strong-toothed jaws as he sits
wagging his beard from side to side. At such times there is in
his eyes a bluish fire like the gleam of charcoal, while his
crooked fingers writhe like worms, and his outward appearance
becomes sheerly that of a magician of iniquity.

Once I asked him:

"What in particular ought men to wait for? "

For a while he sat clasping his beard, and, with contracted
eyes, gazing as at something behind me. Then he said quietly and
didactically:

"Someday there will arise a Strange Man who will proclaim to
the world the Word to which there never was a beginning. But to
which of us is the hour when that Man will arise known? To none
of us.. And to which of us are known the miracles which that
Word will perform? To none of us."

**********************

Once upon a time there used to glide past the window of my room
the fair, curly, wavering, golden head of Nilushka the idiot, a
lad looking like a thing which the earth has begotten of love.
Yes, Nilushka was like an angel in some sacred picture adorning
the southern or the northern gates of an ancient church, as,
with his flushed face smeared with wax-smoke and oil, and his
light blue eyes gleaming in a cold, unearthly smile, and a frame
clad in a red smock reaching to below his knees, and the soles
of his feet showing black (always he walked on tiptoe), and his
thin calves, as straight and white as the calves of a woman,
covered with golden down, he walked the streets.

Sometimes hopping along on one leg, and smiling, and waving his
arms, and causing the ample folds and sleeves of his smock to
flutter until he seemed to be moving in the midst of a nimbus,
Nilushka would sing in a halting whisper the childish ditty:

0h Lo-ord, pardon me!
Wo-olves run,
And do-ogs run,
And the hunters wait
To kill the wolves.
0h Lo-ord, pardon me!

Meanwhile, he would diffuse a cheering atmosphere of happiness
with which no one in the locality had anything in common. For he
was ever a lighthearted, winning, essentially pure innocent of
the type which never fails to evoke good-natured smiles and
kindly emotions. Indeed, as he roamed the streets, the suburb
seemed to live its life with less clamour, to appear more decent
of outward guise, since the local folk looked upon the imbecile
with far more indulgence than they did upon their own children;
and he was intimate with, and beloved by, even the worst.
Probably the reason for this was that the semblance of flight
amid an atmosphere of golden dust which was his combined with
his straight, slender little figure to put all who beheld him in
mind of churches, angels, God, and Paradise. At all events, all
viewed him in a manner contemplative, interested, and more than
a little deferential.

A curious fact was the circumstance that whenever Nilushka
sighted a stray gleam from a piece of glass, or the glitter of a
morsel of copper in sunlight, he would halt dead where he was ,
turn grey with the ashiness of death, lose his smile, and remain
dilating to an unnatural extent his clouded and troubled eyes.
And so, with his whole form distorted with horror, and his thin
hand crossing himself, and his knees trembling, and his smock
fluttering around his frail wisp of a body, and his features
growing stonelike, he would, for an hour or more, continue to
stand, until at length someone laid a hand in his, and led him
home.

The tale had it that, in the first instance, born "soft-headed,"
he finally lost his reason, five years before the
period of which I am writing, when a great fire occurred, and
that thenceforth anything, save sunlight, that in any way
resembled fire plunged him into this torpor of dumb dread.
Naturally the people of the suburb devoted to him a great deal
of attention.

"There goes God's fool," would be their remark. "It will not
be long before he dies and becomes a Saint, and we fall down and
worship him."

Yet there were persons who would go so far as to crack rude
jests at his expense. For instance, as he would be skipping
along, with his childish voice raised in his little ditty, some
idler or another would shout from a window, or through the
cranny of a fence:

"Hi, Nilushka! Fire! Fire!"

Whereupon the angel-faced imbecile would sink to earth as though
his legs had been cut away at the knee from under him, and he
would huddle, frantically clutching his golden head in his
permanently soiled hands, and exposing his youthful form to the
dust, under the nearest house or fence.

Only then would the person who had given him the fright repent,
and say with a laugh:

"God in heaven, what a stupid lad this is!"

And, should that person have been asked why he had thus
terrified the boy, he would probably have replied:

"Because it is such sport to do so. As a lad who cannot feel
things as other human beings do, he inclines folk to make fun of
him."

As for the omniscient Antipa Vologonov, the following was his
frequent comment on Nilushka:

"Christ also had to walk in terror. Christ also was persecuted.
Why so? Because ever He endured in rectitude and strength. Men
need to learn what is real and what is unreal. Many are the
sins of earth come of the fact that the seeming is mistaken for
the actual, and that men keep pressing forward when they ought
to be waiting, to be proving themselves."

Hence Vologonov, like the rest, bestowed much attention upon
Nilushka, and frequently held conversations with him.

"Do you now pray to God," he said once as he pointed to heaven
with one of his crooked fingers, and with the disengaged hand
clasped his dishevelled, variously coloured beard.

Whereupon Nilushka glanced fearfully at the mysteriously
pointing finger, and, plucking sharply at his forehead,
shoulders, and stomach with two fingers and a thumb, intoned in
thin, plaintive accents:

"Our Father in Heaven--"

"WHICH ART in Heaven."

"Yes, in the Heaven of Heavens."

"Ah, well! God will understand. He is the friend of all blessed
ones." [Idiots; since persons mentally deficient are popularly
deemed to stand in a peculiarly close relation to the Almighty.]


Again, great was Nilushka's interest in anything spherical.
Also, he had a love for handling the heads of children; when,
softly approaching a group from behind, he would, with his
bright, quiet smile, lay slender, bony fingers upon a
close-cropped little poll; with the result that the children,
not relishing such fingering, would take alarm at the same, and,
bolting to a discreet distance, thence abuse the idiot, put out
their tongues at him, and drawl in a nasal chorus:

"Nilka, the bottle-neck, the neck without a nape to it"
[Probably the attractiveness of this formula lay rather in the
rhyming of the Russian words: "Nilka, butilka, bashka bez
zatilka!" than in their actual meaning].

Yet their fear of him was in no way reciprocated, nor, for that
matter, did they ever assault him, despite the fact that
occasionally they would throw an old boot or a chip of wood in
his direction-throw it aimlessly, and without really desiring to
hit the mark aimed at.

Also, anything circular--for example, a plate or the wheel of a
toy, engaged Nilushka's attention and led him to caress it as
eagerly as he did globes and balls. Evidently the rotundity of
the object was the point that excited his interest. And as he
turned the object over and over, and felt the flat part of it,
he would mutter:

"But what about the other one?"

What "the other one " meant I could never divine. Nor could
Antipa. Once, drawing the idiot to him, he said:

"Why do you always say 'What about the other one'?"

Troubled and nervous, Nilushka merely muttered some
unintelligible reply as his fingers turned and turned about the
circular object which he was holding.

"Nothing," at length he replied.

"Nothing of what?

"Nothing here."

"Ah, he is too foolish to understand," said Vologonov with a
sigh as his eyes darkened in meditative fashion.

"Yes, though it may seem foolish to say so," he added, "some
people would envy him."

"Why should they?"

"For more than one reason. To begin with, he lives a life free
from care--he is kept comfortably, and even held in respect.
Since no one can properly understand him, and everyone fears
him, through a belief that folk without wit, the 'blessed ones
of God,' are more especially the Almighty's favourites than
persons possessed of understanding. Only a very wise man could
deal with such a matter, and the less so in that it must be
remembered that more than one 'blessed one' has become a Saint,
while some of those possessed of understanding have gone--well,
have gone whither? Yes, indeed!"

And, thoughtfully contracting the bushy eyebrows which looked as
though they had been taken from the face of another man,
Vologonov thrust his hands up his sleeves, and stood eyeing
Nilushka shrewdly with his intangible gaze.

Never did Felitzata say for certain who the boy's father had
been, but at least it was known to me that in vague terms she
had designated two men as such--the one a young " survey
student," and the other a merchant by name Viporotkov, a man
notorious to the whole town as a most turbulent rake and bully.
But once when she and Antipa and I were seated gossiping at the
entrance-gates, and I inquired of her whether Nilushka's father
were still surviving, she replied in a careless way:

"He is so, damn him!"

"Then who is he? "

Felitzata, as usual, licked her faded, but still comely, lips
with the tip of her tongue before she replied:

"A monk."

"Ah!" Vologonov exclaimed with unexpected animation. "That,
then, explains things. At all events, we have in it an
intelligible THEORY of things."

Whereafter, he expounded to us at length, and with no sparing of
details, the reason why a monk should have been Nilushka's
father rather than either the merchant or the young "survey
student." And as Vologonov proceeded he grew unwontedly
enthusiastic, and went so far as to clench his fists until
presently he heaved a sigh, as though mentally hurt, and said
frowningly and reproachfully to the woman:

"Why did you never tell us this before? It was exceedingly
negligent of you."

Felitzata looked at the old man with sarcasm and sauciness
gleaming in her brown eyes. Suddenly, however, she contracted
her brows, counterfeited a sigh, and whined:

"Ah, I was good-looking then, and desired of all. In those days
I had both a good heart and a happy nature."

"But the monk may prove to have been an important factor in the
question," was Antipa's thoughtful remark.

"Yes, and many another man than he has run after me for his
pleasure," continued Felitzata in a tone of reminiscence. This
led Vologonov to cough, rise to his feet, lay his hand upon the
woman's claret-coloured sleeve of satin, and say sternly:

"Do you come into my room, for I have business to transact with
you."

As she complied she smiled and winked at me. And so the pair
departed--he shuffling carefully with his bandy legs, and she
watching her steps as though at any moment she might collapse on
to her left side.

Thenceforth, Felitzata visited Vologonov almost daily; and once
during the time of two hours or so that the pair were occupied
in drinking tea I heard, through the partition-wall, the old man
say in vigorous, level, didactical tones:

"These tales and rumours ought not to be dismissed save with
caution. At least ought they to be given the benefit of the
doubt. For, though all that he says may SEEM to us unintelligible,
there may yet be enshrined therein a meaning, such as--"

"You say a meaning?"

"Yes, a meaning which, eventually, will be vouchsafed to you in
a vision. For example, you may one day see issue from a dense
forest a man of God, and hear him cry aloud: Felitzata, Oh
servant of God, Oh sinner most dark of soul--"

"What a croaking, to be sure!"

"Be silent! No nonsense! Do you blame yourself rather than sing
your own praises. And in that vision you may hear the man of God
cry: 'Felitzata, go you forth and do that which one who shall
meet you may request you to perform!' And, having gone forth,
you may find the man of God to be the monk whom we have spoken
of."

"A-a-ah!" the woman drawled with an air of being about to say
something more.

"Come, fool!"

"You see--"

"Have I, this time, abused you?"

"No, but--"

"I have an idea that the man of God will be holding a crook."

"Of course," assented Felitzata.

Similarly, on another occasion, did I hear Antipa mutter
confidentially to his companion:

"The fact that all his sayings are so simple is not a
favourable sign. For, you see, they do not harmonise with the
affair in its entirety--in such a connection words should be
mysterious, and so, able to be interpreted in more than one
way, seeing that the more meanings words possess, the more are
those words respected and heeded by mankind."

"Why so?" queried Felitzata.

"Why so?" re-echoed Vologonov irritably. "Are we not, then,
to respect ANYONE or ANYTHING? Only he is worthy of respect who
does not harm his fellows; and of those who do not harm their
fellows there are but few. To this point you must pay
attention--you must teach him words of variable import, words
more abstract, as well as more sonorous."

"But I know no such words."

"I will repeat to you a few, and every night, when he goes to
bed, you shall repeat them to HIM. For example: 'Adom ispolneni,
pokaites'[Do ye people who are filled with venom repent].  And
mark that the exact words of the Church be adhered to. For
instance, 'Dushenbitzi, pozhaleite Boga, okayannie,' [Murderers
of the soul, accursed ones, repent ye before God.] must be said
rather than 'Dushenbitzi, pozhaleite Boga, okayanni,' since the
latter, though the shorter form, is also not the correct one.
But perhaps I had better instruct the lad myself."

"Certainly that would be the better plan."

So from that time onwards Vologonov fell to stopping Nilushka in
the street, and repeating to him something or another in his
kindly fashion. Once he even took him by the hand, and, leading
him to his room, and giving him something to cat, said
persuasively:

"Say this after me. 'Do not hasten, Oh ye people.' Try if you
can say that."

"'A lantern,'" began Nilushka civilly.

"'A lantern?' Yes. Well, go on, and say, 'I am a lantern unto
thee--"

"I want to sing, it."

"There is no need for that, though presently you shall sing it.
For the moment your task is to learn the correct speaking of
things. So say after me--"

"0 Lo-ord, have mercy!" came in a quiet, thoughtful chant from
the idiot. Whereafter he added in the coaxing tone of a child:

"We shall all of us have to die."

"Yes, but come, come! " expostulated Vologonov. " What are you
blurting out NOW? That much I know without your telling
me--always have I known, little friend, that each of us is
hastening towards his death. Yet your want of understanding
exceeds what should be."

"Dogs run-"

"Dogs? Now, enough, little fellow."

"Dogs run like chickens. They run here, in the ravine,"
continued Nilushka in the murmuring accents of a child of three.

"Nevertheless," mused Vologonov, "even that seeming nothing of
his may mean something. Yes, there may lie in it a great deal.
Now, say: 'Perdition will arise before him who shall hasten.'"

"No, I want to SING something."

With a splutter Vologonov said:

"Truly you are a difficult subject to deal with!"

And with that he fell to pacing the floor with long, thoughtful
strides as the idiot's voice cried in quavering accents:

"O Lo-ord, have me-ercy upon us!"

****************************

Thus the winsome Nilushka proved indispensable to the foul,
mean, unhealthy life of the suburb. Of that life he coloured and
rounded off the senselessness, the ugliness, the superfluity.  He
resembled an apple hanging forgotten on a gnarled old worm-eaten
tree, whence all the fruit and the leaves have fallen until only
the branches wave in the autumn wind. Rather, he resembled a
sole-surviving picture in the pages of a ragged, soiled old book
which has neither a beginning nor an ending, and therefore can
no longer be read, is no longer worth the reading, since now its
pages contain nothing intelligible.

And as smiling his gracious smile, the lad's pathetic,
legendary figure flitted past the mouldy buts and cracked fences
and riotous beds of nettles, there would readily recur to the
memory, and succeed one another, visions of some of the finer
and more reputable personages of Russian lore--there would file
before one's mental vision, in endless sequence, men whose
biographies inform us how, in fear for their souls, they left
the life of the world, and, hieing them to the forests and the
caves, abandoned mankind for the wild things of nature. And at
the same time would there recur to one's memory poems concerning
the blind and the poor-in particular, the poem concerning Alexei
the Man of God, and all the multitude of other fair, but
unsubstantial, forms wherein Russia has embodied her sad and
terrified soul, her humble and protesting grief. Yet it was a
process to depress one almost to the point of distraction.

Once, forgetting that Nilushka was imbecile, I conceived an
irrepressible desire to talk with him, and to read him good
poetry, and to tell him both of the world's youthful hopes and
of my own personal thoughts.

The occasion happened on a day when, as I was sitting on the
edge of the ravine, and dangling my legs over the ravine's
depths, the lad came floating towards me as though on air. In
his hands, with their fingers as slender as a girl's, he was
holding a large leaf; and as he gazed at it the smile of his
clear blue eyes was, as it were, pervading him from head to foot.

"Whither, Nilushka?" said I.

With a start he raised his head and eyes heavenward. Then
timidly he glanced at the blue shadow of the ravine, and
extended to me his leaf, over the veins of which there was
crawling a ladybird.

"A bukan," he observed.

"It is so. And whither are you going to take it?"

"We shall all of us die. I was going to take and bury it."

"But it is alive; and one does not bury things before they are
dead."

Nilushka closed and opened his eyes once or twice.

"I should like to sing something," he remarked.

"Rather, do you SAY something."

He glanced at the ravine again--his pink nostrils quivering and
dilating-- then sighed as though he was weary, and in all
unconsciousness muttered a foul expression. As he did so I
noticed that on the portion of his neck below his right ear
there was a large birthmark, and that, covered with golden down
like velvet, and resembling in shape a bee, it seemed to be
endowed with a similitude of life, through the faint beating of
a vein in its vicinity.

Presently the ladybird raised her upper wings as though she were
preparing for flight; whereupon Nilushka sought with a finger to
detain her, and, in so doing, let fall the leaf, and enabled the
insect to detach itself and fly away at a low level. Upon that,
bending forward with arms outstretched, the idiot went softly in
pursuit, much as though he himself were launching his body into
leisurely flight, but, when ten paces away, stopped, raised his
face to heaven, and, with arms pendent before him, and the palms
of his hands turned outwards as though resting on something
which I could not see, remained fixed and motionless.

From the ravine there were tending upwards towards the sunlight
some green sprigs of willow, with dull yellow flowers and a
clump of grey wormwood, while the damp cracks which seamed the
clay of the ravine were lined with round leaves of the
"mother-stepmother plant," and round about us little birds were
hovering, and from both the bushes and the bed of the ravine
there was ascending the moist smell of decay. Yet over our heads
the sky was clear, as the sun, now sole occupant of the heavens,
declined slowly in the direction of the dark marshes across the
river; only above the roofs of Zhitnaia Street could there be
seen fluttering about in alarm a flock of snow-white pigeons,
while waving below them was the black besom which had, as it
were, swept them into the air, and from afar one could hear the
sound of an angry murmur, the mournful, mysterious murmur of the
town.

Whiningly, like an old man, a child of the suburb was raising
its voice in lamentation; and as I listened to the sound, it put
me in mind of a clerk reading Vespers amid the desolation of an
empty church. Presently a brown dog passed us with shaggy head
despondently pendent, and eyes as beautiful as those of a
drunken woman.

And, to complete the picture, there was standing-- outlined
against the nearest shanty of the suburb, a shanty which lay at
the extreme edge of the ravine-there was standing, face to the
sun, and back to the town, as though preparing for flight, the
straight, slender form of the boy who, while alien to all,
caressed all with the eternally incomprehensible smile of his
angel-like eyes. Yes, that golden birthmark so like a bee I can
see to this day!

********************************

Two weeks later, on a Sunday at mid-day, Nilushka passed into
the other world. That day, after returning home from late Mass,
and handing to his mother a couple of wafers which had been
given him as a mark of charity, the lad said:

"Mother, please lay out my bed on the chest, for I think that I
am going to lie down for the last time."

Yet the words in no way surprised Felitzata, for he had often
before remarked, before retiring to rest:

"Some day we shall all of us have to die."

At the same time, whereas, on previous occasions, Nilushka had
never gone to sleep without first of all singing to himself his
little song, and then chanting the eternal, universal "Lord,
have mercy upon us! " he, on this occasion, merely folded his
hands upon his breast, closed his eyes, and relapsed into
slumber.

That day Felitzata had dinner, and then departed on business of
her own; and when she returned in the evening, she was astonished
to find that her son was still asleep. Next, on looking closer
at him, she perceived that he was dead.

"I looked," she related plaintively to some of the suburban
residents who came running to her cot, "and perceived his
little feet to be blue; and since it was only just before Mass
that I had washed his hands with soap, I remarked the more
readily that his feet were become less white than his hands. And
when I felt one of those hands, I found that it had stiffened."

On Felitzata's face, as she recounted this, there was manifest a
nervous expression. Likewise, her features were a trifle
flushed. Yet gleaming also through the tears in her languorous
eyes there was a sense of relief--one might almost have said a
sense of joy.

"Next," continued she, "I looked closer still, and then fell
on my knees before the body, sobbing: '0h my darling, whither
art thou fled? 0h God, wherefore hast Thou taken him from me?' "

Here Felitzata inclined her head upon her left shoulder
contracted her brows over her mischievous eyes, clasped her
hands to her breast, and fell into the lament:

Oh, gone is my dove, my radiant moon!
0 star of mine eyes, thou hast set too soon!
In darksome depths thy light lies drown'd,
And time must yet complete its round,
And the trump of the Second Advent sound,
Ere ever my--

"Here, you! Hold your tongue!" grunted Vologonov irritably.

For myself, I had, that day, been walking in the forest, until,
as I returned, I was brought up short before the windows of
Felitzata's cot by the fact that some of the erstwhile turbulent
denizens of the suburb were whispering softly together as, with
an absence of all noise, they took turns to raise themselves on
tiptoe, and, craning their necks, to peer into one of the black
window-spaces. Yes, like bees on the step of a hive did they
look, and on the great majority of faces, and in the great
majority of eyes, there was quivering an air of tense, nervous
expectancy.

Only Vologonov was nudging Felitzata, and saying to her in a
loud, authoritative tone:

"Very ready are you to weep, but I should like first to hear
the exact circumstances of the lad's death."

Thus invited, the woman wiped her eyes with the sleeve of her
bodice, licked her lips, heaved a prolonged sigh, and fell to
regarding Antipa's red, hardbitten face with the cheerful,
unabashed glance of a person who is under the influence of
liquor. From under her white head-band there had fallen over her
temples and her right cheek a few wisps of golden hair; and
indeed, as she drew herself up, and tossed her head and bosom,
and smoothed out and stretched the creases in her bodice, she
looked less than her years. Everyone now fell to eyeing her in
an attentive silence, though not, it would seem, without a touch
of envy.

Abruptly, sternly, the old man inquired:

"Did the lad ever complain of ill-health?"

"No, never," Felitzata replied. "Never once did he speak of
it--never once."

"And he had not been beaten?"

"Oh, how can you ask me such a thing, and especially seeing
that, that--?"

"I did not say beaten by YOU."

"Well, I cannot answer for anyone else, but at least had he no
mark on his body, seeing that when I lifted the smock I could
find nothing save for scratches on legs and back."

Her tone now had in it a new ring, a ring of increased
assurance, and when she had finished she closed her bright eyes
languidly before heaving a soft, as it were, voluptuous, and,
withal, very audible sigh.

Someone here murmured:

"She DID use to beat him."

"What?"

"At all events she used to lose her temper with him."

This led to the putting of a further dozen or so of leading
questions; whereafter Antipa, for a while, preserved a
suggestive silence, and the crowd too remained silent, as though
it had suddenly been lulled to slumber. Only at long last, and
with a clearing of his throat, did Antipa say:

"Friends, we must suppose that God, of His infinite Mercy, has
vouchsafed to us here a special visitation, in that, as all of
us have perceived, a lad bereft of wit, the same radiant lad
whom all of us have known, has here abided in the closest of
communion with the Blessed Dispenser of life on earth."

Then I moved away, for upon my heart there was pressing a burden
of unendurable sorrow, and I was yearning, oh, so terribly, to
see Nilushka once more.

The back portion of Felitzata's cot stood a little sunken into
the ground, so that the front portion had its cold window panes
and raised sash tilted a trifle towards the remote heavens. I
bent my head, and entered by the open door. Near the threshold
Nilushka was lying on a narrow chest against the wall. The folds
of a dark-red pillow of fustian under the head set off to
perfection the pale blue tint of his round, innocent face under
its corona of golden curls; and though the eyes were closed, and
the lips pressed tightly together, he still seemed to be smiling
in his old quiet, but joyous, way. In general, the tall, thin
figure on the mattress of dark felt, with its bare legs, and its
slender hands and wrists folded across the breast, reminded me
less of an angel than of a certain image of the Holy Child with
which a blackened old ikon had rendered me familiar from my
boyhood upwards.

Everything amid the purple gloom was still. Even the flies were
forbearing to buzz. Only from the street was there grating
through the shaded window the strong, roguish voice of Felitzata
as it traced the strange, lugubrious word-pattern:

With my bosom pressed to the warm, grey earth,
To thee, grey earth, to thee, 0h my mother of old,
I beseech thee, I who am a mother like thee,
And a mother in pain, to enfold in thy arms
This my son, this my dead son, this my ruby,
This my drop of my heart's blood, this my--

Suddenly I caught sight of Antipa standing in the doorway. He
was wiping his eyes with the back of his hand. Presently in a
gruff and unsteady voice he said:

"It is all very fine for you to weep, good woman, but the
present is not the right moment to sing such verses as
those--they were meant, rather, to be sung in a graveyard at the
side of a tomb. Well, tell me everything without reserve.
Important is it that I should know EVERYTHING."

Whereafter, having crossed himself with a faltering hand, he
carefully scrutinised the corpse, and at last let his eyes halt
upon the lad's sweet features. Then he muttered sadly:

"How extraordinarily he has grown! Yes, death has indeed
enlarged him! Ah, well, so be it! Soon I too shall have to be
stretching myself out. Oh that it were now!"

Then with cautious movements of his deformed fingers he
straightened the folds of the lad's smock, and drew it over the
legs. Whereafter he pressed his flushed lips to the hem of the
garment.

Said I to him at that moment:

"What is it that you have been wanting of him? Why is it that
you have been trying to teach him strange words?"

Straightening himself, and glancing at me with dim eyes, Antipa
repeated:

"What is it that I have been wanting of him?" To the repetition
he added with manifest sincerity, though also with a
self-depreciatory movement of the head:

"To tell the truth, I scarcely know WHAT it is that I have been
wanting of him. By God I do not. Yet, as one speaking the truth
in the presence of death, I say that never during my long
lifetime had I so desired aught else. . . . Yes, I have waited
and waited for fortune to reveal it to me; and ever has fortune
remained mute and tongueless. Foolish was it of me to have
expected otherwise, to have expected, for instance, that some
day there might occur something marvellous, something
unlooked-for."

With a short laugh, he indicated the corpse with his eyes, and
continued more firmly:

"Yes, bootless was it to have expected anything from such a
source as that. Never, despite one's wishes, was anything
possible of acquisition thence. . . This is usually the case.
Felitzata, as a clever woman indeed (albeit one cold of heart),
was for having her son accounted a God's fool, and thereby
gaining some provision against her old age."

"But you yourself were the person who suggested that? You
yourself wished it? "

"I?"

Presently. thrusting his hands up his sleeves, he added dully
and brokenly:

"Yes, I DID wish it. Why not, indeed, seeing that at least it
would have brought comfort to the poor people of this place?
Sometimes I feel very sorry for them with their bitter,
troublous lives--lives which may be the lives of rogues and
villains, yet are lives which have produced amongst us a
pravednik," [A "just person," a human being without sin].

All the evening sky was now aflame. Upon the ear there fell the
mournful lament:

When snow has veiled the earth in white,
The snowy plain the wild wolves tread.
They wail for the cheering warmth of spring
As I bewail the bairn that's dead.

Vologonov listened for a moment. Then he said firmly:

"These are mere accesses of impulse which come upon her. And
that is only what might be expected. Even as in song or in vice
there is no holding her, so remorse, when it has fastened upon
such a woman's heart, will know no bounds. I may tell you that
on one occasion two young merchants took her, stripped her stark
naked, and drove her in their carriage down Zhitnaia Street,
with themselves sitting on the seats of the vehicle, and
Felitzata standing upright between them--yes, in a state of
nudity! Thereafter they beat her almost to death."

As I stepped out into the dark, narrow vestibule, Antipa, who
was following me, muttered:

"Such a lament as hers could come only of genuine grief."

We found Felitzata in front of the hut, with her back covering
the window. There, with hands pressed to her bosom, and her
skirt all awry, she was straining her dishevelled head towards
the heavens, while the evening breeze, stirring her fine auburn
hair, scattered it promiscuously over her flushed,
sharply-defined features and wildly protruding eyes. A bizarre,
pitiable, and extraordinary figure did she cut as she wailed in
a throaty voice which constantly gathered strength:

0h winds of ice, winds cruel and rude,
Press on my heart till its throbbings fail!
Arrest the current of my blood!
Turn these hot melting tears to hail!

Before her there was posted a knot of women, compassionate
contemplators of the singer's distracted, grief-wrought
features. Through the ravine's dark opening I could see the sun
sinking below the suburb before plunging into the marshy forest
and having his disk pierced by sharp, black tips of pine trees.
Already everything around him was red. Already, seemingly, he
had been wounded, and was bleeding to death.



THE CEMETERY

In a town of the steppes where I found life exceedingly dull, the
best and the brightest spot was the cemetery. Often did I use to
walk there, and once it happened that I fell asleep on some
thick, rich, sweet-smelling grass in a cradle-like hollow
between two tombs.

From that sleep I was awakened with the sound of blows being
struck against the ground near my head. The concussion of them
jarred me not a little, as the earth quivered and tinkled like a
bell. Raising myself to a sitting posture, I found sleep still
so heavy upon me that at first my eyes remained blinded with
unfathomable darkness, and could not discern what the matter
was. The only thing that I could see amid the golden glare of
the June sunlight was a wavering blur which at intervals seemed
to adhere to a grey cross, and to make it give forth a
succession of soft creaks.

Presently, however--against my wish, indeed--that wavering blur
resolved itself into a little, elderly man. Sharp-featured, with
a thick, silvery tuft of hair beneath his under lip, and a bushy
white moustache curled in military fashion, on his upper, he
was using the cross as a means of support as, with his
disengaged hand outstretched, and sawing the air, he dug his
foot repeatedly into the ground, and, as he did so, bestowed
upon me sundry dry, covert glances from the depths of a pair of
dark eyes.

"What have you got there?" I inquired.

"A snake," he replied in an educated bass voice, and with a
rugged forefinger he pointed downwards;  whereupon I perceived
that wriggling on the path at his feet and convulsively
whisking its tail, there was an echidna.

"Oh, it is only a grassworm," I said vexedly.

The old man pushed away the dull, iridescent, rope-like thing
with the toe of his boot, raised a straw hat in salute, and
strode firmly onwards.

"I thank you," I called out; whereupon, he replied without
looking behind him:

"If the thing really WAS a grassworm, of course there was no
danger."

Then he disappeared among the tombstones.

Looking at the sky, I perceived the time to be about five
o'clock.

The steppe wind was sighing over the tombs, and causing long
stems of grass to rock to and fro, and freighting the heated air
with the silken rustling of birches and limes and other trees,
and leading one to detect amid the humming of summer a note of
quiet grief eminently calculated to evoke lofty, direct thoughts
concerning life and one's fellow-men.

Veiling with greenery, grey and white tombstones worn with the
snows of winter, crosses streaked with marks of rain, and the
wall with which the graveyard was encircled, the rank vegetation
served to also conceal the propinquity of a slovenly, clamorous
town which lay coated with rich, sooty grime amid an atmosphere
of dust and smells.

As I set off for a ramble among the tombs and tangled grass, I
could discern through openings in the curtain of verdure a
belfry's gilded cross which reared itself solemnly over crosses
and memorials. At the foot of those memorials the sacramental
vestment of the cemetery was studded with a kaleidoscopic sheen
of flowers over which bees and wasps were so hovering and
humming that the grass's sad, prayerful murmur seemed charged
with a song of life which yet did not hinder reflections on
death. Fluttering above me on noiseless wing were birds the
flight of which sometimes made me start, and stand wondering
whether the object before my gaze was really a bird or not: and
everywhere the shimmer of gilded sunlight was setting the
close-packed graveyard in a quiver which made the mounds of its
tombs reminiscent of a sea when, after a storm, the wind has
fallen, and all the green level is an expanse of smooth,
foamless billows.

Beyond the wall of the cemetery the blue void of the firmament
was pierced with smoky chimneys of oil-mills and soap factories,
the roofs of which showed up like particoloured stains against
the darker rags and tatters of other buildings; while blinking
in the sunlight I could discern clatter-emitting, windows which
looked to me like watchful eyes. Only on the nearer side of the
wall was a sparse strip of turf dotted over with ragged,
withered, tremulous stems, and beyond this, again, lay the site
of a burnt building which constituted a black patch of
earth-heaps, broken stoves, dull grey ashes, and coal dust. To
heaven gaped the black, noisome mouths of burning-pits wherein
the more economical citizens were accustomed nightly to get rid
of the contents of their dustbins. Among the tall stems of
steppe grass waved large, glossy leaves of ergot; in the
sunlight splinters of broken glass sparkled as though they were
laughing; and, from two spots in the dark brown plot which formed
a semicircle around the cemetery, there projected, like teeth,
two buildings the new yellow paint of which nevertheless made
them look mean and petty amid the tangle of rubbish, pigweed,
groundsel, and dock.

Indolently roaming hither and thither, a few speckled hens
resembled female pedlars, and some pompous red cockerels a
troupe of firemen; in the orifices of the burning-pits a number
of mournful-eyed, homeless dogs were lying sheltered; among the
shoots of the steppe scrub some lean cats were stalking
sparrows; and a band of children who were playing hide-and-seek
among the orifices above-mentioned presented, a pitiful sight as
they went skipping over the filthy earth, disappearing in
the crevices among the piles of heaped-up dirt.

Beyond the site of the burnt-out building there stretched a
series of mean, close-packed huts which, crammed exclusively
with needy folk, stood staring, with their dim, humble eyes of
windows, at the crumbling bricks of the cemetery wall, and the
dense mass of trees which that wall enclosed. Here, in one such
hut, had I myself a lodging in a diminutive attic, which not
only smelt of lamp-oil, but stood in a position to have wafted
to it the least gasp or ejaculation on the part of my landlord,
Iraklei Virubov, a clerk in the local treasury. In short, I
could never glance out of the window at the cemetery on the
other side of the strip of dead, burnt, polluted earth without
reflecting that, by comparison, that cemetery was a place of
sheer beauty, a place of ceaseless attraction.

And ever, that day, as though he had been following me, could
there be sighted among the tombs the dark figure of the old man
who had so abruptly awakened me from slumber; and since his
straw hat reflected the sunlight as brilliantly as the disk of a
sunflower as it meandered hither and thither, I, in my turn,
found myself following him, though thinking, all the while, of
Iraklei Virubov. Only a week was it since Iraklei's wife, a
thin, shrewish, long-nosed woman with green and catlike eyes,
had set forth on a pilgrimage to Kiev, and Iraklei had hastened
to import into the hut a stout, squint-eyed damsel whom he had
introduced to me as his " niece by marriage."

"She was baptised Evdokia," he had said on the occasion
referred to. "Usually, however, I call her Dikanka. Pray be
friendly with her, but remember, also, that she is not a person
with whom to take liberties."

Large, round-shouldered, and clean-shaven like a chef, Virubov
was for ever hitching up breeches which had slipped from a
stomach ruined with surfeits of watermelon. And always were his
fat lips parted as though athirst, and perpetually had he in his
colourless eyes an expression of insatiable hunger.

One evening I overheard a dialogue to the following effect.

"Dikanka, pray come and scratch my back. Yes, between the
shoulder-blades. O-o-oh, that is it. My word, how strong you
are!"

Whereat Dikanka had laughed shrilly. And only when I had moved
my chair, and thrown down my book, had the laughter and unctuous
whispering died away, and given place to a whisper of:

"Holy Father Nicholas, pray for us unto God! Is the supper kvas
ready, Dikanka?"

And softly the pair had departed to the kitchen--there to grunt
and squeal once more like a couple of pigs....

The old man with the grey moustache stepped over the turf with
the elastic stride of youth, until at length he halted before a
large monument in drab granite, and stood reading the
inscription thereon. Featured not altogether in accordance with
the Russian type, he had on a dark-blue jacket, a turned-down
collar, and a black stock finished off with a large bow--the
latter contrasting agreeably with the thick, silvery, as it were
molten, chin-tuft. Also, from the centre of a fierce moustache
there projected a long and gristly nose, while over the grey
skin of his cheeks there ran a network of small red veins. In
the act of raising his hand to his hat (presumably for the
purpose of saluting the dead), he, after conning the dark
letters of the inscription on the tomb, turned a sidelong eye
upon myself; and since I found the fact embarrassing, I frowned,
and passed onward, full, still, of thoughts of the street where
I was residing and where I desired to fathom the mean existence
eked out by Virubov and his "niece."

As usual, the tombs were also being patrolled by Pimesha,
otherwise Pimen Krozootov, a bibulous, broken-down ex-merchant
who used to spend his time in stumbling and falling about the
graves in search of the supposed resting-place of his wife. Bent
of body, Pimesha had a small, bird-like face over-grown with
grey down, the eyes of a sick rabbit, and, in general, the
appearance of having undergone a chewing by a set of sharp
teeth. For the past three years he had thus been roaming the
cemetery, though his legs were too weak to support his
undersized, shattered body; and whenever he caught his foot he
fell, and for long could not rise, but lay gasping and fumbling
among the grass, and rooting it up, and sniffing with a nose as
sharp and red as though the skin had been flayed from it. True,
his wife had been buried at Novotchevkassk, a thousand versts
away, but Pimen refused to credit the fact, and always, on being
told it, stuttered with much blinking of his wet, faded eyes:
"Natasha? Natasha is here."

Also, there used to visit the spot, well-nigh daily, a Madame
Christoforov, a tall old lady who, wearing black spectacles and
a plain grey, shroudlike dress that was trimmed with black
velvet, never failed to have a stick between her abnormally long
fingers. Wizened of face, with cheeks hanging down like bags,
and a knot of grey, rather, grey-green, hair combed over her
temples from under a lace scarf, and almost concealing her ears,
this lady pursued her way with deliberation, and entire
assurance, and yielded the path to no one whom she might
encounter. I have an idea that there lay buried there a son who
had been killed in a roisterers' brawl.

Another habitual visitor was thin-legged, short-sighted Aulic
Councillor Praotzev, ex-schoolmaster. With a book stuffed into
the pocket of his canvas pea-jacket, a white umbrella grasped in
his red hand, and a smile extending to ears as sharp and pointed
as a rabbit's, he could, any Sunday after dinner, be seen
skipping from tomb to tomb, with his umbrella brandished like a
white flag soliciting terms of peace with death.

And, on returning home before the bell rang for Vespers, he
would find that a crowd of boys had collected outside his garden
wall; whereupon, dancing about him like puppies around a stork,
they would fall to shouting in various merry keys:

"The Councillor, the Councillor! Who was it that fell in love
with Madame Sukhinikh, and then fell into the pond? "

Losing his temper, and opening a great mouth, until he looked
like an old rook which is about to caw, the Councillor would
stamp his foot several times, as though preparing to dance to
the boys' shouting, and lower his head, grasp his umbrella like
a bayonet, and charge at the lads with a panting shout of:

"I'll tell your fathers! Oh, I'll tell your mothers!"

As for the Madame Sukhinikh, referred to, she was an old
beggar-woman who, the year round, and in all weathers, sat on a
little bench beside the cemetery wicket, and stuck to it like a
stone. Her large face, a face rendered bricklike by years of
inebriety, was covered with dark blotches born of frostbite,
alcoholic inflammation, sunburn, and exposure to wind, and her
eyes were perpetually in a state of suppuration. Never did
anyone pass her but she proffered a wooden cup in a suppliant
hand, and cried hoarsely, rather as though she were cursing the
person concerned:

"Give something for Christ's sake! Give in memory of your
kinsfolk there!"

Once an unexpected storm blew in from the steppes, and brought a
downpour which, overtaking the old woman on her way home, caused
her, her sight being poor, to fall into a pond, whence Praotzev
attempted to rescue her, and into which, in the end, he slipped
himself. From that day onwards he was twitted on the subject by
the boys of the town.

Other frequenters of the cemetery I see before me--dark, silent
figures, figures of persons whom still unsevered cords of memory
seemed to have bound to the place for the rest of their lives,
and compelled to wander, like unburied corpses, in quest of
suitable tombs. Yes, they were persons whom life had rejected,
and death, as yet, refused to accept.

Also, at times there would emerge from the long grass a homeless
dog with large, sullen eyes, eyes startling at once in their
intelligence and in their absolute Ishmaelitism-- until one
almost expected to hear issue from the animal's mouth reproaches
couched in human language.

And sometimes the dog would still remain halted in the cemetery
as, with tail lowered, it swayed its shelterless, shaggy head to
and fro with an air of profound reflection, while occasionally
venting a subdued, long-drawn yelp or howl.

Again, among the dense old lime trees, there would be scurrying
an unseen mob of starlings and jackdaws whose young would,
meanwhile, maintain a soft, hungry piping, a sort of gently
persuasive, chirruping chorus; until in autumn, when the wind
had stripped bare the boughs, these birds' black nests would
come to look like mouldy, rag-swathed heads of human beings
which someone had torn from their bodies and flung into the
trees, to hang for ever around the white, sugarloaf-shaped
church of the martyred St. Barbara. During that autumn season,
indeed, everything in the cemetery's vicinity looked sad and
tarnished, and the wind would wail about the place, and sigh
like a lover who has been driven mad through bereavement . . . .

Suddenly the old man halted before me on the path, and, sternly
extending a hand towards a white stone monument near us, read
aloud:

"'Under this cross there lies buried the body of the respected
citizen and servant of God, Diomid Petrovitch Ussov,'" etc.,
etc.

Whereafter the old man replaced his hat, thrust his hands into
the pockets of his pea-jacket, measured me with eyes dark in
colour, but exceptionally clear for his time of life, and said:

"It would seem that folk could find nothing to say of this man
beyond that he was a 'servant of God.' Now, how can a servant
be worthy of honour at the hand of 'citizens'?"

"Possibly he was an ascetic," was my hazarded conjecture;
whereupon the old man rejoined with a stamp of his foot:

"Then in such case one ought to write--"

"To write what?"

"To write EVERYTHING, in fullest possible detail."

And with the long, firm stride of a soldier my interlocutor
passed onwards towards a more remote portion of the
cemetery--myself walking, this time, beside him. His stature
placed his head on a level with my shoulder only, and caused his
straw hat to conceal his features. Hence, since I wished to look
at him as he discoursed, I found myself forced to walk with head
bent, as though I had been escorting a woman.

"No, that is not the way to do it," presently he continued in
the soft, civil voice of one who has a complaint to present.
"Any such proceeding is merely a mark of barbarism--of a complete
lack of observation of men and life."

With a hand taken from one of his pockets, he traced a large
circle in the air.

"Do you know the meaning of that?" he inquired.

"Its meaning is death," was my diffident reply, made with a
shrug of the shoulders.

A shake of his head disclosed to me a keen, agreeable, finely
cut face as he pronounced the following Slavonic words:

"'Smertu smert vsekonechnie pogublena bwist.'" [Death hath
been for ever overthrown by death."]

"Do you know that passage?" he added presently.

Yet it was in silence that we walked the next ten paces--he
threading his way along the rough, grassy path at considerable
speed. Suddenly he halted, raised his hat from his head, and
proffered me a hand.

"Young man," he said, "let us make one another's better
acquaintance. I am Lieutenant Savva Yaloylev Khorvat, formerly
of the State Remount Establishment, subsequently of the
Department of Imperial Lands. I am a man who, after never having
been found officially remiss, am living in honourable
retirement--a man at once a householder, a widower, and a person
of hasty temper."

Then, after a pause, he added:

"Vice-Governor Khorvat of Tambov is my brother--a younger
brother; he being fifty-five, and I sixty-one, si-i-ixty one."

His speech was rapid, but as precise as though no mistake was
permissible in its delivery.

"Also," he continued, "as a man cognisant of every possible
species of cemetery, I am much dissatisfied with this one. In
fact, never satisfied with such places am I."

Here he brandished his fist in the air, and described a large
arc over the crosses.

"Let us sit down," he said, "and I will explain things."

So, after that we had seated ourselves on a bench beside a white
oratory, and Lieutenant Khorvat had taken off his hat, and with
a blue handkerchief wiped his forehead and the thick silvery
hair which bristled from the knobs of his scalp, he continued:

"Mark you well the word kladbistche." [The word, though
customarily used for cemetery, means, primarily, a
treasure-house.]  Here he nudged me with his elbow--continuing,
thereafter, more softly: "In a kladbisiche one might reasonably
look for kladi, for treasures of intellect and enlightenment.
Yet what do we find? Only that which is offensive and insulting.
All of us does it insult, for thereby is an insult paid to all
who, in life, are bearing still their 'cross and burden.' You
too will, one day, be insulted by the system, even as shall I.
Do you understand? I repeat, 'their cross and burden'--the sense
of the words being that, life being hard and difficult, we ought
to honour none but those who STILL are bearing their trials, or
bearing trials for you and me. Now, THESE folk here have ceased
to possess consciousness."

Each time that the old man waved his hat in his excitement, its
small shadow, bird-like, flew along the narrow path, and over
the cross, and, finally, disappeared in the direction of the
town.

Next, distending his ruddy cheeks, twitching his moustache, and
regarding me covertly out of boylike eyes, the Lieutenant
resumed:

"Probably you are thinking, 'The man with whom I have to deal
is old and half-witted.' But no, young fellow; that is not so,
for long before YOUR time had I taken the measure of life.
Regard these memorials. ARE they memorials? For what do they
commemorate as concerns you and myself? They commemorate, in
that respect, nothing. No, they are not memorials; they are
merely passports or testimonials conferred upon itself by human
stupidity. Under a given cross there may lie a Maria, and under
another one a Daria, or an Alexei, or an Evsei, or someone
else--all 'servants of God,' but not otherwise particularised. An
outrage this, sir! For in this place folk who have lived their
difficult portion of life on earth are seen robbed of that
record of their existences, which ought to have been preserved
for your and my instruction. Yes, A DESCRIPTION OF THE LIFE
LIVED BY A MAN is what matters. A tomb might then become even
more interesting than a novel. Do you follow me?"

"Not altogether," I rejoined.

He heaved a very audible sigh.

"It should be easy enough," was his remark. "To begin with, I
am NOT a 'servant of God.' Rather, I am a man intelligently, of
set purpose, keeping God's holy commandments so far as lies
within my power. And no one, not even God, has any right to
demand of me more than I can give. That is so, is it not?"

I nodded.

"There!" the Lieutenant cried briskly as, cocking his hat, he
assumed a still more truculent air. Then, spreading out his
hands, he growled in his flexible bass:

"What is this cemetery? It is merely a place of show."

At this moment, for some reason or another, there occurred to me
an incident which involved the figure of Iraklei Virubov, the
figure which had carpet slippers on its ponderous feet, thick
lips, a greedy mouth, deceitful eyes, and a frame so huge and
cavernous that the dapper little Lieutenant could have stepped
into it complete.

The day had been a Sunday, and the hour eventide. On the burnt
plot of ground some broken glass had been emitting a reddish
gleam, shoots of ergot had been diffusing their gloss, children
shouting at play, dogs trotting backwards and forwards, and all
things, seemingly, faring well, sunken in the stillness of the
portion of the town adjoining the rolling, vacant steppe, with,
above them, only the sky's level, dull-blue canopy, and around
them, only the cemetery, like an island amidst a sea.

With Virubov, I had been sitting on a bench near the wicket-gate
of his hut, as intermittently he had screwed his lecherous eyes
in the direction of the stout, ox-eyed lacemaker, Madame Ezhov,
who, after disposing of her form on a bank hard-by, had fallen
to picking lice out of the curls of her eight-year-old Petka
Koshkodav. Presently, as swiftly she had rummaged the boy's hair
with fingers grown used to such rapid movement, she had said to
her husband (a dealer in second-hand articles), who had been
seated within doors, and therefore rendered invisible--she had
said with oily derision:

"Oh, yes, you bald-headed old devil, you! Of course you got
your price. Ye-es. Then, fool, you ought to have had a slipper
smacked across that Kalmuck snout of yours. Talk of my price,
indeed!"

Upon this Virubov had remarked with a sigh, and in sluggish,
sententious tones:

"To grant the serfs emancipation was a sheer mistake. I am a
humble enough servant of my country, yet I can see the truth of
what I have stated, since it follows as a matter of course. What
ought to have been done is that all the estates of the
landowners should have been conveyed to the Tsar. Beyond a doubt
that is so. Then both the peasantry and the townsfolk, the whole
people, in short, would have had but a single landlord. For
never can the people live properly so long as it is ignorant of
the point where it stands; and since it loves authority, it
loves to have over it an autocratic force, for its control.
Always can it be seen seeking such a force."

Then, bending forward, and infusing into each softly uttered
word a perfect lusciousness of falsity, Virubov had added to his
neighbour:

"Take, for example, the working-woman who stands free of every
tie."

"How do I stand free of anything?" the neighbour had retorted,
in complete readiness for a quarrel.

"Oh, I am not speaking in your despite, Pavlushka, but to your
credit," hastily Virubov had protested.

"Then keep your blandishments for that heifer, your 'niece,'"
had been Madame Ezhov's response.

Upon this Virubov had risen heavily, and remarked as he moved
away towards the courtyard:

"All folk need to be supervised by an autocratic eye."

Thereafter had followed a bout of choice abuse between his
neighbour and his " niece,"while Virubov himself, framed in the
wicket-gate, and listening to the contest, had smacked his lips
as he gazed at the pair, and particularly at Madame Ezhov. At
the beginning of the bout Dikanka had screeched:

"It is my opinion, it is my opinion, that--"

"Don't treat me to any of YOUR slop!" the long-fanged Pavla
had interrupted for the benefit of the street in general. And
thus had the affair continued....

Lieutenant Khorvat blew the fag-end of his cigarette from his
mouthpiece, glanced at me, and said with seemingly, a not
over-civil, twitch of his bushy moustache:

"Of what are you thinking, if I might inquire?"

"I am trying to understand you."

"You ought not to find that difficult," was his rejoinder as
again he doffed his hat, and fanned his face with it. "The
whole thing may be summed up in two words. It is that we lack
respect both for ourselves and for our fellow men. Do you follow
me NOW?"

His eyes had grown once more young and clear, and, seizing my
hand in his strong and agreeably warm fingers, he continued:

"Why so? For the very simple reason that I cannot respect
myself when I can learn nothing, simply nothing, about my
fellows."

Moving nearer to me, he added in a mysterious undertone:

"In this Russia of ours none of us really knows why he has come
into existence. True, each of us knows that he was born, and
that he is alive, and that one day he will die; but which of us
knows the reason why all that is so?"

Through renewed excitement, its colour had come back to the
Lieutenant's face, and his gestures became so rapid as to cause
the ring on his finger to flash through the air like the link of
a chain. Also, I was able to detect the fact that on the
small, neat wrist under his left cuff, there was a bracelet
finished with a medallion.

"All this, my good sir, is because (partially through the fact
that men forget the point, and partially through the fact that
that point fails to be understood aright) the WORK done by a
man is concealed from our knowledge. For my own part, I have an
idea, a scheme--yes, a scheme--in two words, a, a--"

"N-n-o-u, n-n-o-u!" the bell of the monastery tolled over the
tombs in languid, chilly accents.

"--a scheme that every town and every village, in fact, every
unit of homogeneous population, should keep a record of the
particular unit's affairs, a, so to speak, 'book of life.' This
'book of life' should be more than a list of the results of the
unit's labour; it should also be a living narrative of the
workaday activities accomplished by each member of the unit. Eh?
And, of course, the record to be compiled without official
interference--solely by the town council or district
administration, or by a special 'board, of life and works' or
some such body, provided only that the task be not carried out
by nominees of the GOVERNMENT. And in that record there should
be entered everything--that is to say, everything of a nature
which ought to be made public concerning every man who
has lived among us, and has since gone from our midst."

Here the Lieutenant stretched out his hand again in the
direction of the tombs.

"My right it is," he added, "to know how those folk there
spent their lives. For it is by their labours and their
thoughts, and even on the product of their bones, that I myself
am now subsisting. You agree, do you not?"

In silence I nodded; whereupon he cried triumphantly:

"Ah! You see, do you? Yes, an indispensable point is it, that
whatsoever a man may have done, whether good or evil, should be
recorded. For example, suppose he has manufactured a stove
specially good for heating purposes; record the fact. Or
suppose he has killed a mad dog; record the fact. Or suppose he
has built a school, or cleansed a dirty street, or been a
pioneer in the teaching of sound farming, or striven, by word
and deed, his life long, to combat official irregularities...
record the fact.  Again, suppose a woman has borne ten, or
fifteen, healthy children; record the fact. Yes, and this last
with particular care, since the conferment of healthy children
upon the country is a work of absolute importance."

Further, pointing to a grey headstone with a worn inscription,
he shouted (or almost did so):

"Under that stone lies buried the body of a man who never in
his life loved but one woman, but ONE woman. Now, THAT is a fact
which ought to have been recorded about him for it is not
merely a string of names that is wanted, but a narrative of
deeds. Yes, I have not only a desire, but a RIGHT, to know the
lives which men have lived, and the works which they have
performed; and whenever a man leaves our midst we ought to
inscribe over his tomb full particulars of the 'cross and
burden' which he bore, as particulars ever to be held in
remembrance, and inscribed there both for my benefit and for the
benefit of life in general, as constituting a clear and
circumstantial record of the given career. Why did that man
live? To the question write down, always, the answer in large
and conspicuous characters. Eh?"

"Most certainly."

This led the Lieutenant's enthusiasm to increase still more as,
for the third time waving his hand in the direction of the
tombs, and mouthing each word, he continued:

"The folk of that town are liars pure and simple, for of set
purpose they conceal the particulars of careers that they may
depreciate those careers in our eyes, and, while showing us the
insignificance of the dead, fill the living with a sense of
similar insignificance, since insignificant folk are the easiest
to manage. Yes, it is a scheme thought out with diabolical
ingenuity. Yet, for myself--well, try and make me do what I don't
intend to do!"

To which, with his face wrinkled with disgust, he added in a
tone like a shot from a pistol:

"Machines are we! Yes, machines, and nothing else!"

Curious was it to watch the old man's excitement as one listened
to the strong bass voice amid the stillness of the cemetery.
Once more over the tombs, there came floating the languid,
metallic notes of " N-n-o-u! N-n-o-u!"

The oily gloss on the withered grass had vanished, faded, and
everything turned dull, though the air remained charged with the
spring perfume of the geraniums, stocks, and narcissi which
encircled some of the graves.

"You see," continued the Lieutenant, "one could not deny that
each of us has his value. By the time that one has lived
threescore years, one perceives that fact very clearly. Never
CONCEAL things, since every life lived ought to be set in the
light. And is capable of being so, in that every man is a
workman for the world at large, and constitutes an instructor in
good or in evil, and that life, when looked into, constitutes,
as a whole, the sum of all the labour done by the aggregate of
us petty, insignificant individuals. That is why we ought not to
hide away a man's work, but to publish it abroad, and to
inscribe on the cross over his tomb his deeds, his services, in
their entirety. Yes, however negligible may have been those
deeds, those services, hold them up for the perusal of those who
can discover good even in what is negligible. NOW do you
understand me?"

"I do," I replied. "Yes, I do."

"Good!"

The bell of the monastery struck two hasty beats--then became
silent, so that only the sad echo of its voice remained
reverberating over the cemetery. Once more my interlocutor drew
out his cigarette-case, silently offered it to myself, and
lighted and puffed industriously at another cigarette. As he did
so his hands, as small and brown as the claws of a bird, shook a
little, and his head, bent down, looked like an Easter egg in
plush.

Still smoking, he looked me in the eyes with a self-diffident
frown, and muttered:

"Only through the labour of man does the earth attain
development. And only by familiarising himself with, and
remembering, the past can man obtain support in his work on
earth."

In speaking, the Lieutenant lowered his arm; whereupon on to his
wrist there slipped the broad golden bracelet adorned with a
medallion, and there gazed at me thence the miniature of a
fair-haired woman: and since the hand below it was freckled, and
its flexible fingers were swollen out of shape, and had lost
their symmetry, the woman's fine-drawn face looked the more full
of life, and, clearly picked out, could be seen to be smiling a
sweet and slightly imperious smile.

"Your wife or your daughter?" I queried.

"My God! My God!" was, with a subdued sigh, the only response
vouchsafed. Then the Lieutenant raised his arm, and the bracelet
slid back to its resting place under his cuff.

Over the town the columns of curling smoke were growing redder,
and the clattering windows blushing to a tint of pink that
recalled to my memory the livid cheeks of Virubov's "niece," of
the woman in whom, like her uncle, there was nothing that could
provoke one to "take liberties."

Next, there scaled the cemetery wall and stealthily stretched
themselves on the ground, so that they looked not unlike the
far-flung shadows of the cemetery's crosses, a file of dark,
tattered figures of beggars, while on the further side of the
slowly darkening greenery a cantor drawled in sluggish, careless
accents:

"E-e-ternal me-e--"

"Eternal memory of what?" exclaimed Lieutenant Khorvat with an
angry shrug of his shoulders. "Suppose, in his day, a man has
been the best cucumber-salter or mushroom-pickler in a given
town. Or suppose he has been the best cobbler there, or that
once he said something which the street wherein he dwelt can
still remember. Would not THAT man be a man whose record should
be preserved, and made accessible to my recollection?"

And again the Lieutenant's face wreathed itself in solid rings
of pungent tobacco smoke.

Blowing softly for a moment, the wind bent the long stems of
grass in the direction of the declining sun, and died away. All
that remained audible amid the stillness was the peevish voices
of women saying:

"To the left, I say."

"Oh, what is to be done, Tanechka?"

Expelling a fresh cloud of tobacco smoke in cylindrical form,
the old man muttered:

"It would seem that those women have forgotten the precise spot
where their relative or friend happens to lie buried."

As a hawk flew over the sun-reddened belfry-cross, the bird's
shadow glided over a memorial stone near the spot where we were
sitting, glanced off the corner of the stone, and appeared anew
beyond it. And in the watching of this shadow, I somehow found a
pleasant diversion.

Went on the Lieutenant:

"I say that a graveyard ought to evince the victory of life,
the triumph of intellect and of labour, rather than the power of
death. However, imagine how things would work out under my
scheme. Under it the record of which I have spoken would
constitute a history of a town's life which, if anything, would
increase men's respect for their fellows. Yes, such a history as
THAT is what a cemetery ought to be. Otherwise the place is
useless. Similarly will the past prove useless if it can give us
nothing. Yet is such a history ever compiled? If it is, how can
one say that events are brought about by, forsooth, 'servants of
God'?"

Pointing to the tombs with a gesture as though he were swimming,
he paused for a moment or two.

"You are a good man," I said, "and a man who must have lived a
good and interesting life."

He did not look at me, but answered quietly and thoughtfully:

"At least a man ought to be his fellows' friend, seeing that to
them he is beholden for everything that he possesses and for
everything that he contains. I myself have lived--"

Here, with a contraction of his brows, he fell to gazing about
him, as though he were seeking the necessary word; until,
seeming to fail to find it, he continued gravely:

"Men need to be brought closer together, until life shall have
become better adjusted. Never forget those who are departed,
for anything and everything in the life of a 'servant of God'
may prove instructive and of profound significance."

On the white sides of the memorial-stones, the setting sun was
casting warm lurid reflections, until the stonework looked as
though it had been splashed with hot blood. Moreover, every
thing around us seemed curiously to have swelled and grown
larger and softer and less cold of outline; the whole scene,
though as motionless as ever, appeared to have taken on a sort
of bright-red humidity, and deposited that humidity in purple,
scintillating, quivering dew on the turf's various spikes and
tufts. Gradually, also, the shadows were deepening and
lengthening, while on the further side of the cemetery wall a
cow lowed at intervals, in a gross and drunken fashion, and a
party of fowls cackled what seemed to be curses in response, and
a saw grated and screeched.

Suddenly the Lieutenant burst into a peal of subdued laughter,
and continued to do so until his shoulders shook. At length he
said through the paroxysms, as, giving me a push, he cocked his
hat boyishly:

"I must confess that, that--that the view which I first took of
you was rather a tragic one. You see, when I saw a man lying
prone on the grass I said to myself: 'H'm! What is that?' Next I
saw a young fellow roaming about the cemetery with a frown
settled on his face, and his breeches bulging; and again I said
to myself--"

"A book is lying in my breeches pocket," I interposed.

"Ah! Then I understand. Yes, I made a mistake, but a very,
welcome one. However, as I say, when I first saw you, I said to
myself: 'There is a man lying near that tomb. Perhaps he has a
bullet, a wound, in his temple?' And, as you know--"

He stopped to wink at me with another outburst of soft,
good-humoured laughter. Then he continued.

"Nevertheless, the scheme of which I have told you cannot really
be called a scheme, since it is merely a fancy of my own. Yet I
SHOULD like to see life lived in better fashion."

He sighed and paused, for evidently he was becoming lost in
thought.

"Unfortunately," he continued at last, "the latter is a desire
which I have conceived too late. If only I had done so fifteen
years ago, when I was filling the post of Inspector of the
prison at Usman--"

His left arm stretched itself out, and once more there slid on
to his wrist the bracelet. For a moment he touched its gold with
a rapid, but careful, delicate, movement--then he restored the
trinket to its retreat, rose suddenly, looked about him for a
second or two with a frown, and said in dry, brisk tones as he
gave his iron-grey moustache an energetic twist:

"Now I must be going."

For a while I accompanied him on his way, for I had a keen
desire to hear him say something more in that pleasant, powerful
bass of his; but though he stepped past the gravestones with
strides as careful and regular as those of a soldier on parade,
he failed again to break silence.

Just as we passed the chapel of the monastery there floated
forth into the fair evening stillness, from the bars, of a
window, while yet not really stirring that stillness, a hum of
gruff, lazy, peevish ejaculations. Apparently they were uttered
by two persons who were engaged in a dispute, since one of them
muttered:

"What have you done? What have you done?"

And the other responded carelessly:

"Hold your tongue, now! Pray hold your tongue!"



ON A RIVER STEAMER

The water of the river was smooth, and dull silver of tint.
Also, so barely perceptible was the current that it seemed to be
almost stagnant under the mist of the noontide heat, and only by
the changes in the aspect of the banks could one realise how
quietly and evenly the river was carrying on its surface the old
yellow-hulled steamer with the white-rimmed funnel, and also the
clumsy barge which was being towed in her wake.

Dreamily did the floats of the paddle-wheels slap the water.
Under the planks of the deck the engines toiled without ceasing.
Steam hissed and panted. At intervals the engine-room bell
jarred upon the car. At intervals, also, the tiller-chains slid
to and fro with a dull, rattling sound. Yet, owing to the
somnolent stillness settled upon the river, these sounds
escaped, failed to catch one's attention.

Through the dryness of the summer the water was low.
Periodically, in the steamer's bow, a deck hand like a king, a
man with a lean,, yellow, black-avised face and a pair of
languishing eyes, threw overboard a polished log as in tones of
melting melancholy he chanted:

"Se-em, se-em, shest!"

["Seven, seven, six!"(the depth of water, reckoned in sazheni
or fathoms)]

It was as though he were wailing:

"Seyem, seyem, a yest-NISHEVO"

[Let us eat, let us eat, but to eat there is--nothing]

Meanwhile, the steamer kept turning her stearlet-like [The
stearlet is a fish of the salmon species] prow deliberately and
alternately towards either bank as the barge yawed behind her,
and the grey hawser kept tautening and quivering, and sending
out showers of gold and silver sparkles. Ever and anon, too, the
captain on the bridge kept shouting, hoarsely through a
speaking-trumpet:

"About, there!"

Under the stem of the barge a wave ran which, divided into a
pair of white wings, serpentined away towards either bank.

In the meadowed distance peat seemed to be being burnt, and over
the black forest there had gathered an opalescent cloud of smoke
which also suffused the neighbouring marshes.

To the right, the bank of the river towered up into lofty,
precipitous, clayey slopes intersected with ravines wherein
aspens and birches found shelter.

Everything ashore had about it a restful, sultry, deserted look.
Even in the dull blue, torrid sky there was nought save a
white-hot sun.

In endless vista were meadows studded with trees--trees sleeping
in lonely isolation, and, in places, surmounted with either the
cross of a rural church which looked like a day star or the
sails of a windmill; while further back from the banks lay the
tissue cloths of ripening crops, with, here and there, a human
habitation.

Throughout, the scene was indistinct. Everything in it was calm,
touchingly simple, intimate, intelligible, grateful to the soul.
So much so that as one contemplated the slowly-varying vistas
presented by the loftier bank, the immutable stretches of
meadowland, and the green, timbered dance-rings where the forest
approached the river, to gaze at itself in the watery mirror,
and recede again into the peaceful distance; as one gazed at all
this one could not but reflect that nowhere else could a spot
more simply, more kindly, more beautiful be found, than these peaceful
shores of the great river.

Yet already a few shrubs by the river's margin were beginning to
display yellow leaves, though the landscape as a whole was
smiling the doubtful, meditative smile of a young bride who,
about to bear her first child, is feeling at once nervous and
delighted at the prospect.

*************************

The hour was past noon, and the third-class passengers, languid
with fatigue induced by the heat, were engaged in drinking
either tea or beer. Seated mostly on the bulwarks of the
steamer, they silently scanned the banks, while the deck
quivered, crockery clattered at the buffet, and the deck hand in
the bows sighed soporifically:

Six! Six! Six-and-a-half!

From the engine-room a grimy stoker emerged. Rolling along, and
scraping his bare feet audibly against the deck, he approached
the boatswain's cabin, where the said boatswain, a fair-haired,
fair-bearded man from Kostroma was standing in the doorway. The
senior official contracted his rugged eyes quizzically, and
inquired:

"Whither in such a hurry?"

"To pick a bone with Mitka."

"Good!"

With a wave of his black hand the stoker resumed his way, while
the boatswain, yawning, fell to casting his eyes about him. On a
locker near the companion of the engine-room a small man in a
buff pea-jacket, a new cap, and a pair of boots on which there
were clots of dried mud, was seated.

Through lack of diversion the boatswain began to feel inclined
to hector somebody, so cried sternly to the man in question:

"Hi there, chawbacon!"

The man on the locker turned about--turned nervously, and much as
a bullock turns. That is to say, he turned with his whole body.

"Why have you gone and put yourself THERE?" inquired the
boatswain. "Though there is a notice to tell you NOT to sit
there, it is there that you must go and sit! Can't you read?"

Rising, the passenger inspected not the notice, but the locker.
Then he replied:

"Read? Yes, I CAN read."

"Then why sit there where you oughtn't to?"

"I cannot see any notice."

"Well, it's hot there anyway, and the smell of oil comes up
from the engines. . . . Whence have you come?"

"From Kashira."

"Long from home?"

"Three weeks, about."

"Any rain at your place?"

"No. But why?"

"How come your boots are so muddy?"

The passenger lowered his head, extended cautiously first one
foot, and then the other, scrutinised them both, and replied:

"You see, they are not my boots."

With a roar of laughter that caused his brilliant beard to
project from his chin, the boatswain retorted:

"I think you must drink a bit."

The passenger said nothing more, but retreated quietly, and with
short strides, to the stem. From the fact that the sleeves of
his pea-jacket reached far below his wrists, it was clear that
the garment had originated from the shoulders of another man.

As for the boatswain, on noting the circumspection and
diffidence with which the passenger walked, he frowned, sucked
at his beard, approached a sailor who was engaged in vigorously
scrubbing the brass on the door of the captain's cabin with a
naked palm, and said in an undertone:

"Did you happen to notice the gait of that little man there in
the light pea-jacket and dirty boots? "

"I did."

"Then see here. Do keep an eye upon him."

"But why? Is he a bad lot?"

"Something like it, I think."

"I will then."

At a table near the hatchway of the first-class cabin, a fat man
in grey was drinking beer. Already he had reached a state of
moderate fuddlement, for his eyes were protruding sightlessly
and staring unwinkingly at the opposite wall. Meanwhile, a number
of flies were swarming in the sticky puddles on the table, or
else crawling over his greyish beard and the brick-red skin of
his motionless features.

The boatswain winked in his direction, and remarked:

"Half-seas over, HE is."

"'Tis his way," a pockmarked, eyebrow-less sailor responded.

Here the drunken man sneezed: with the result that a cloud of
flies were blown over the table. Looking at them, and sighing as
his companion had done, the boatswain thoughtfully observed:

"Why, he regularly sneezes flies, eh?"

******************************

The resting-place which I myself had selected was a stack of
firewood over the stokehole shoot; and as I lay upon it I could
see the hills gradually darkening the water with a mourning veil
as calmly they advanced to meet the steamer; while in the
meadows, a last lingering glow of the sunset's radiance was
reddening the stems of the birches, and making the newly mended
roof of a hut look as though it were cased in red fustian--
communicating to everything else in the vicinity a semblance of
floating amid fire-- and effacing all outline, and causing the
scene as a whole to dissolve into streaks of red and orange and
blue, save where, on a hill above the hut, a black grove of firs
stood thrown into tense, keen, and clear-cut relief.

Under a hill a party of fishermen had lit a wood fire, the
flames of which could be seen playing upon, and picking out, the
white hull of a boat-- the dark figure of a man therein, a
fishing net suspended from some stakes, and a woman in a yellow
bodice who was sitting beside the fire. Also, amid the golden
radiance there could be distinguished a quivering of the leaves
on the lower branches of the tree whereunder the woman sat
shaded.

All the river was calm, and not a sound occurred to break the
stillness ashore, while the air under the awning of the
third-class portion of the vessel felt as stifling as during the
earlier part of the day. By this time the conversation of the
passengers, damped by the shadow of dusk, had merged into a
single sound which resembled the humming of bees; and amid it
one could not distinguish nor divine who was speaking, nor the
subject of discussion, since every word therein seemed
disconnected, even though all appeared to be talking amicably,
and in order, concerning a common topic. At one moment a
suppressed laugh from a young woman would reach the ear; in the
cabin, a party who had agreed to sing a song of general
acceptation were failing to hit upon one, and disputing the
point in low and dispassionate accents; and in each, such sound
there was something vespertinal, gently sad, softly prayer-like.

From behind the firewood near me a thick, rasping voice said in
deliberate tones:

"At first he was a useful young fellow enough, and clean and
spruce; but lately, he has become shabby and dirty, and is going
to the dogs."

Another voice, loud and gruff, replied:

"Aha! Avoid the ladies, or one is bound to go amiss."

"The saying has it that always a fish makes for deeper water."

"Besides, he is a fool, and that is worse still. By the way, he
is a relative of yours, isn't he?"

"Yes. He is my brother."

"Indeed? Then pray forgive me."

"Certainly; but, to speak plainly, he is a fool."

At this moment I saw the passenger in the buff pea-jacket
approach the sally-port, grasp with his left hand a stanchion,
and step on to the grating under which one of the paddle-wheels
was churning the water to foam. There he stood looking over the
bulwarks with a swinging motion akin to that of a bat when,
grappling some object or another with its wings, it hangs
suspended in the air. The fact that the man's cap was drawn
tightly over his ears caused the latter to stick out almost to
the point of absurdity.

Presently he turned and peered into the gloom under the awning,
though, seemingly, he failed to distinguish myself reposing on
the firewood. This enabled me to gain a clear view of a face
with a sharp nose, some tufts of light-coloured hair on cheeks
and chin, and a pair of small, muddy-looking eyes. He stood
there as though he were listening to something.

All of a sudden he stepped firmly to the sally-port, swiftly
unlashed from the iron top-rail a mop, and threw it overboard.
Then he set about unlashing a second article of the same species.

"Hi!" I shouted to him. "What are you doing there?"

With a start the man turned round, clapped a hand to his
forehead to discover my whereabouts, and replied softly and
rapidly, and with a stammer in his voice:

"How is that your business? Get away with you!"

Upon this I approached him, for I was astonished and amused at
his impudence.

"For what you have done the sailors will make you pay right
enough," I remarked.

He tucked up the sleeves of his pea-jacket as though he were
preparing for a fight. Then, stamping his foot upon the slippery
grating, he muttered:

"I perceived the mop to have come untied, and to be in danger
of falling into the water through the vibration. Upon that I
tried to secure it, and failed, for it slipped from my hands as
I was doing so."

"But," I remarked in amazement, "my belief is that you
WILLFULLY untied the mop, to throw it overboard!"

"Come, come!" he retorted. "Why should I have done that? What
an extraordinary thing it would have been to do! How could it
have been possible?"

Here he dodged me with a dexterous movement, and, rearranging
his sleeves, walked away. The length of the pea-jacket made his
legs look absurdly short, and caused me to notice that in his
gait there was a tendency to shuffle and hesitate.

Returning to my retreat, I stretched myself upon the firewood
once more, inhaled its resinous odour, and fell to listening to
the slow-moving dialogue of some of the passengers around me.

"Ah, good sir," a gruff, sarcastic voice began at my side-- but
instantly a yet gruffer voice intervened with:

"Well?"

"Oh, nothing, except that to ask a question is easy, and to
answer it may be difficult."

"True."

From the ravines a mist was spreading over the river.

****************************

At length night fell, and as folk relapsed into slumber the
babel of tongues became stilled. The car, as it grew used to the
boisterous roar of the engines and the measured rhythm of the
paddle-wheels, did not at first notice the new sound born of the
fact that into the sounds previously made familiar there began
to intrude the snores of slumberers, and the padding of soft
footsteps, and an excited whisper of:

"I said to him--yes, I said: 'Yasha, you must not, you shall
not, do this.'"

The banks had disappeared from view. Indeed, one continued to be
reminded of their existence only by the slow passage of the
scattered fires ashore, and the fact that the darkness lay
blacker and denser around those fires than elsewhere. Dimly
reflected in the river, the stars seemed to be absolutely
motionless, whereas the trailing, golden reproductions of the
steamer's lights never ceased to quiver, as though striving to
break adrift, and float away into the obscurity. Meanwhile, foam
like tissue paper was licking our dark hull, while at our stern,
and sometimes overtaking it, there trailed a barge with a couple
of lanterns in her prow, and a third on her mast, which at one
moment marked the reflections of the stars, and at another
became merged with the gleams of firelight on one or the other
bank.

On a bench under a lantern near the spot where I was lying a
stout woman was asleep. With one hand resting upon a small
bundle under her head, she had her bodice torn under the armpit,
so that the white flesh and a tuft of hair could be seen
protruding. Also, her face was large, dark of brow, and full of
jowl to a point that caused the cheeks to roll to her very ears.
Lastly, her thick lips were parted in an ungainly, corpselike
smile.

From my own position on a level higher than hers, I looked
dreamily down upon her, and reflected: "She is a little over
forty years of age, and (probably) a good woman. Also, she is
travelling to visit either her daughter and son-in-law, or her
son and daughter-in-law, and therefore is taking with her some
presents. Also, there is in her large heart much of the
excellent and maternal."

Suddenly something near me flashed as though a match had been
struck, and, opening my eyes, I perceived the passenger in the
curious pea-jacket to be standing near the woman spoken of, and
engaged in shielding a lighted match with his sleeve. Presently,
he extended his hand and cautiously applied the particle of
flame to the tuft of hair under the woman's armpit. There
followed a faint hiss, and a noxious smell of burning hair was
wafted to my nostrils.

I leapt up, seized the man by the collar, and shook him soundly.

"What are you at?" I exclaimed.

Turning in my grasp he whispered with a scarcely audible, but
exceedingly repulsive, giggle:

"Haven't I given her a good fright, eh?"

Then he added:

"Now, let me go! Let go, I say!"

"Have you lost your wits?" I retorted with a gasp.

For a moment or two his blinking eyes continued to glance at
something over my shoulder. Then they returned to me, while he
whispered:

"Pray let me go. The truth is that, unable to sleep, I
conceived that I would play this woman a trick. Was there any
harm in that? See, now. She is still asleep."

As I thrust him away his short legs, legs which might almost
have been amputated, staggered under him. Meanwhile I reflected:

"No, I was NOT wrong. He DID of set purpose throw the mop
overboard. What a fellow! "

A bell sounded from the engine-room.

"Slow!" someone shouted with a cheerful hail.

Upon that, steam issued with such resounding shrillness that the
woman awoke with a jerk of her head; and as she put up her left
hand to feel her armpit, her crumpled features gathered
themselves into wrinkles. Then she glanced at the lamp, raised
herself to a sitting position, and, fingering the place where
the hair had been destroyed, said softly to herself:

"Oh, holy Mother of God!"

Presently the steamer drew to a wharf, and, with a loud
clattering, firewood was dragged forth and cast into the
stokehole with uncouth, warning cries of " Tru-us-sha! " [The
word means ship' s hold or stokehole, but here is, probably,
equivalent to the English " Heads below!"]

Over a little town which had its back pressed against a hill the
waning moon was rising and brightening all the black river,
causing it to gather life as the radiance laved, as it were, the
landscape in warm water.

Walking aft, I seated myself among some bales and contemplated
the town's frontage. Over one end of it rose, tapering like a
walking-stick, a factory chimney, while at the other end, as
well as in the middle, rose belfries, one of which had a gilded
steeple, and the other one a steeple either green or blue, but
looking black in the moonlight, and shaped like a ragged
paint-brush.

Opposite the wharf there was stuck in the wide gable of a
two-storied building a lantern which, flickering, diffused but a
dull, anaemic light from its dirty panes, while over the long
strip of the broken signboard of the building there could be
seen straggling, and executed in large yellow letters, the
words, "Tavern and -" No more of the legend than this was
visible.

Lanterns were hanging in two or three other spots in the drowsy
little town; and wherever their murky stains of light hung
suspended in the air there stood out in relief a medley of
gables, drab-tinted trees, and false windows in white paint,
on walls of a dull slate colour.

Somehow I found contemplation of the scene depressing.

Meanwhile the vessel continued to emit steam as she rocked to
and fro with a creaking of wood, a slap-slapping of water,
and a scrubbing of her sides against the wharf. At length
someone ejaculated surlily:

"Fool, you must be asleep! The winch, you say? Why, the winch
is at the stern, damn you!"

"Off again, thank the Lord!" added the rasping voice already
heard from behind the bales, while to it an equally familiar
voice rejoined with a yawn:

"It's time we WERE off!"

Said a hoarse voice:

"Look here, young fellow. What was it he shouted?"

Hastily and inarticulately, with a great deal of smacking of the
lips and stuttering, someone replied:

"He shouted: 'Kinsmen, do not kill me! Have some mercy, for
Christ's sake, and I will make over to you everything--yes,
everything into your good hands for ever! Only let me go away,
and expiate my sins, and save my soul through prayer. Aye, I
will go on a pilgrimage, and remain hidden my life long, to the
very end. Never shall you hear of me again, nor see me.' Then
Uncle Peter caught him a blow on the head, and his blood
splashed out upon me. As he fell I--well, I ran away, and made
for the tavern, where I knocked at the door and shouted:
'Sister, they have killed our father!' Upon that, she put her
head out of the window, but only said: 'That merely means that
the rascal is making an excuse for vodka.' . . . Aye, a terrible
time it was--was that night! And how frightened I felt! At first,
I made for the garret, but presently thought to myself: 'No;
they would soon find me there, and put me to an end as well, for
I am the heir direct, and should be the first to succeed to the
property.' So I crawled on to the roof, and there lay hidden
behind the chimney-stack, holding on with arms and legs,
while unable to speak for sheer terror."

"What were you afraid of?" a brusque voice interrupted.

"What was I afraid of?"

"At all events, you joined your uncle in killing your father,
didn't you?"

"In such an hour one has not time to think--one just kills a man
because one can't help oneself, or because it seems so easy to
kill."

"True," the hoarser voice commented in dull and ponderous
accents. "When once blood has flowed the fact leads to more
blood, and if a man has started out to kill, he cares nothing
for any reason--he finds good enough the reason which comes first
to his hand."

"But if this young fellow is speaking the truth, he had a
BUSINESS reason--though, properly speaking, even property ought
not to provoke quarrels."

"Similarly one ought not to kill just when one chooses. Folk
who commit such crimes should have justice meted out to them."

"Yes, but it is difficult always to obtain such justice. For
instance, this young fellow seems to have spent over a year in
prison for nothing."

"'For nothing'? Why, did he not entice his father into the
hut, and then shut the door upon him, and throw a coat over his
head? He has said so himself. 'For nothing,' indeed!"

Upon this the rapid stream of sobbed, disconnected words, which I
had heard before from some speaker poured forth anew. Somehow, I
guessed that it came from the man in the dirty boots, as once
more he recounted the story of the murder.

"I do not wish to justify myself," he said. "I say merely
that, inasmuch as I was promised a reprieve at the trial, I told
everything, and was therefore allowed to go free, while my uncle
and my brother were sentenced to penal servitude."

"But you KNEW that they had agreed to kill him?"

"Well, it is my idea that at first they intended only to give
him a good fright. Never did my father recognise me as his
son--always he called me a Jesuit."

The gruffer of the two voices pulled up the speaker.

"To think," it said, "that you can actually talk about it all!"

"Why shouldn't I? My father brought tears to the eyes of many
an innocent person."

"A fig for people's tears! If our causes of tears were one and
all to be murdered, what would the state of things become? Shed
tears, but never blood; for blood is not yours to shed. And even
if you should believe your own blood to be your own, know that
it is not so, that your blood does not belong to you, but to
Someone Else."

"The point in question was my father's property. It all shows
how a man may live awhile, and earn his living, and then
suddenly go amiss, and lose his wits, and even conceive a grudge
against his own father. . . . Now I must get some sleep."

Behind the bales all grew quiet. Presently I rose to peer in
that direction. The passenger in the buff pea-jacket was sitting
huddled up against a coil of rope, with his hands thrust into
his sleeves, and his chin resting upon his arms. As the moon was
shining straight into his face, I could see that the latter was
as livid as that of a corpse, and had its brows drawn down over
its narrow, insignificant eyes.

Beside him, and close to my head, there was lying stretched on
the top of the coil of rope a broad-shouldered peasant in a
short smock and a pair of patched boots of white felt. The
ringlets of the wearer's curly beard were thrust upwards, and
his hands clasped behind his head, and with ox-like eyes he
stared at the zenith where a few stars were shining, and the moon
was beginning to sink.

At length, in a trumpet-like voice (though he seemed to do his
best to soften it) the peasant asked:

"Your uncle is on that barge, I suppose?"

"He is. And so is my brother."

"Yet you are here! How strange!"

The dark barge, towed against the steamer's blue-silver wash of
foam, was cleaving it like a plough, while under the moon the
lights of the barge showed white, and the hull and the
prisoners' cage stood raised high out of the water as to our
right the black, indentated bank glided past in sinuous
convolutions.

From the whole, soft, liquescent fluid scene, the impression which I derived was melancholy.
It evoked in my spirit a sense of instability, a lack of restfulness.

"Why are you travelling?"

"Because I wish to have a word with him."

"With your uncle?"

"Yes."

"About the property?"

"What else?"

"Then look here, my young fellow. Drop it all--both your uncle
and the property, and betake yourself to a monastery, and there
live and pray. For if you have shed blood, and especially if you
have shed the blood of a kinsman, you will stand for ever
estranged from all, while, moreover, bloodshed is a dangerous
thing--it may at any time come back upon you."

"But the property?" the young fellow asked with a lift of his
head.

"Let it go," the peasant vouchsafed as he closed his eyes.

On the younger man's face the down twitched as though a wind had
stirred it. He yawned, and looked about him for a moment. Then,
descrying myself, he cried in a tone of resentment:

"What are you looking at? And why do you keep following me
about?"

Here the big peasant opened his eyes, and, with a glance first
at the man, and then at myself, growled:

"Less noise there, you mitten-face!"

**************************

As I retired to my nook and lay down, I reflected that what the
big peasant had said was apposite enough-that the young fellow's
face did in very truth resemble an old and shabby woollen mitten.

Presently I dreamt that I was painting a belfry, and that, as I
did so, huge, goggle-eyed jackdaws kept flying around the
belfry's gables, and flapping at me with their wings and
hindering my work: until, as I sought to beat them off, I missed
my footing, fell to earth, and awoke to find my breath choking
amid a dull, sick, painful feeling of lassitude and weakness,
and a kaleidoscopic mist quavering before my eyes till it
rendered me dizzy. From my head, behind the car, a thin stream
of blood was trickling.

Rising with some difficulty to my feet, I stepped aft to a pump,
washed my head under a jet of cold water, bound it with my
handkerchief, and, returning, inspected my resting-place in a
state of bewilderment as to what could have caused the accident
to happen.

On the deck near the spot where I had been asleep, there was
standing stacked a pile of small logs prepared for the cook's
galley; while, in the precise spot where my head had rested there
was reposing a birch faggot of which the withy-tie had come
unfastened. As I raised the fallen faggot I perceived it to be
clean and composed of silky loppings of birch-bark which rustled
as I fingered them; and, consequently, I reflected that the
ceaseless vibration of the steamer must have caused the faggot
to become jerked on to my head.

Reassured by this plausible explanation of the unfortunate, but
absurd, occurrence of which I have spoken, I next returned to
the stern, where there were no oppressive odours to be
encountered, and whence a good view was obtainable.

The hour was the turn of the night, the hour of maximum tension
before dawn, the hour when all the world seems plunged in a
profundity of slumber whence there can be no awakening, and when
the completeness of the silence attunes the soul to special
sensibility, and when the stars seem to be hanging strangely
close to earth, and the morning star, in particular, to be
shining as brightly as a miniature sun. Yet already had the
heavens begun to grow coldly grey, to lose their nocturnal
softness and warmth, while the rays of the stars were drooping
like petals, and the moon, hitherto golden, had turned pale and
become dusted over with silver, and moved further from the earth
as intangibly the water of the river sloughed its thick, viscous
gleam, and swiftly emitted and withdrew, stray, pearly
reflections of the changes occurring in the heavenly tints.

In the east there was rising, and hanging suspended over the
black spears of the pine forest, a thin pink mist the sensuous
hue of which was glowing ever brighter, and assuming a density
ever greater, and standing forth more boldly and clearly, even
as a whisper of timid prayer merges into a song of exultant
thankfulness. Another moment, and the spiked tops of the pines
blazed into points of red fire resembling festival candles in a
sanctuary.

Next, an unseen hand threw over the water, drew along its
surface, a transparent and many-coloured net of silk. This was
the morning breeze, herald of dawn, as with a coating of
tissue-like, silvery scales it rippled the river until the eye
grew weary of trying to follow the play of gold and
mother-of-pearl and purple and bluish-green reflected from the
sun-renovated heavens.

Next, like a fan there unfolded themselves the first
sword-shaped beams of day, with their tips blindingly white;
while simultaneously one seemed to hear descending from an
iilimitable height a dense sound-wave of silver bells, a
sound-wave advancing triumphantly to greet the sun as his
roseate rim became visible over the forest like the rim of a cup
that, filled with the essence of life, was about to empty its
contents upon the earth, and to pour a bounteous flood of
creative puissance upon the marshes whence a reddish vapour as
of incense was arising. Meanwhile on the more precipitous of the
two banks some of the trees near the river's margin were
throwing soft green shadows over the water, while gilt-like dew
was sparkling. on the herbage, and birds were awakening, and as
a white gull skimmed the water's surface on level wings, the pale
shadow of those wings followed the bird over the tinted expanse,
while the sun, suspended in flame behind the forest, like the
Imperial bird of the fairy-tale, rose higher and higher into the
greenish-blue zenith, until silvery Venus, expiring, herself
looked like a bird.

Here and there on the yellow strip of sand by the river's margin,
long-legged snipe were scurrying about. Two fishermen were
rocking in a boat in the steamer's wash as they hauled their
tackle. Floating from the shore there began to reach us such
vocal sounds of morning as the crowing of cocks, the lowing of
cattle, and the persistent murmur of human voices.

Similarly the buff-coloured bales in the steamer's stem
gradually reddened, as did the grey tints in the beard of the
large peasant where, sprawling his ponderous form over the deck,
he was lying asleep with mouth open, nostrils distended with
stertorous snores, brows raised as though in astonishment, and
thick moustache intermittently twitching.

Someone amid the piles of bales was panting as he fidgeted, and
as I glanced in that direction I encountered the gaze of a pair
of small, narrow, inflamed eyes, and beheld before me the
ragged, mitten-like face, though now it looked even thinner and
greyer than it had done on the previous evening. Apparently its
owner was feeling cold, for he had hunched his chin between his
knees, and clasped his hirsute arms around his legs, as his eyes
stared gloomily, with a hunted air, in my direction. Then
wearily, lifelessly he said:

"Yes,you have found me. And now you can thrash me if you wish
to do so--you can give me a blow, for I gave you one, and,
consequently, it's your turn to do the hitting."

Stupefied with astonishment, I inquired in an undertone.

"It was you, then, that hit me?"

"It was so, but where are your witnesses?"

The words came in hoarse, croaked, suppressed accents, with a
separation of the hands, and an upthrow of the head and
projecting cars which had such a comical look of being crushed
beneath the weight of the battened-down cap. Next, thrusting his
hands into the pockets of his pea-jacket, the man repeated in a
tone of challenge:

"Where, I say, are your witnesses? You can go to the devil!"

I could discern in him something at once helpless and froglike
which evoked in me a strong feeling of repulsion; and since,
with that, I had no real wish to converse with him, or even to
revenge myself upon him for his cowardly blow, I turned away in
silence.

But a moment later I looked at him again, and saw that he was
seated in his former posture, with his arms embracing his knees,
his chin resting upon them, and his red, sleepless eyes gazing
lifelessly at the barge which the steamer was towing between
wide ribbons of foaming water--ribbons sparkling in the sunlight
like mash in a brewer's vat.

And those eyes, that dead, alienated expression, the gay
cheerfulness of the morning, and the clear radiance of the
heavens, and the kindly tints of the two banks, and the vocal
sounds of the June day, and the bracing freshness of the air,
and the whole scene around us served but to throw into the more
tragic relief.

*******************************

Just as the steamer was leaving Sundir the man threw himself
into the water;in the sight of everybody he sprang overboard.
Upon that all shouted, jostled their neighbours as they rushed
to the side, and fell to scanning the river where from bank to
bank it lay wrapped in blinding glitter.

The whistle sounded in fitful alarm, the sailors threw lifebelts
overboard, the deck rumbled like a drum under the crowd's
surging  rush, steam hissed afflightedly, a woman vented an
hysterical cry, and the captain bawled from the bridge the
imperious command:

"Avast heaving lifebelts! By now the fool will have got one!
Damn you, calm the passengers!"

An unwashed, untidy priest with timid, staring eyes thrust back
his long, dishevelled hair, and fell to repeating, as his fat
shoulder jostled all and sundry, and his feet tripped people up.

"A muzhik, is it, or a woman? A muzhik, eh?"

By the time that I had made my way to the stern the man had
fallen far behind the stern of the barge, and his head looked as
small as a fly on the glassy surface of the water. However,
towards that fly a fishing-boat was already darting with the
swiftness of a water beetle, and causing its two oars to show
quiveringly red and grey, while from the marshier of the two
banks there began hastily to put out a second boat which leapt
in the steamer's wash with the gaiety of a young calf.

Suddenly there broke into the painful hubbub on the steamer's
deck a faint, heartrending cry of "A-a-ah!"

In answer to it a sharp-nosed, black-bearded, well-dressed
peasant muttered with a smack of his lips:

"Ah! That is him shouting. What a madman he must have been! And
an ugly customer too, wasn't he?"

The peasant with the curly beard rejoined in a tone of
conviction engulfing all other utterances:

"It is his conscience that is catching him. Think what you
like, but never can conscience be suppressed."

Therewith, constantly interrupting one another, the pair betook
themselves to a public recital of the tragic story of the
fair-haired young fellow, whom the fishermen had now lifted from
the water, and were conveying towards the steamer with oars that
oscillated at top speed.

The bearded peasant continued:

"As soon as it was seen that he was but running after the
soldier's wife."

"Besides," the other peasant interrupted, "the property was
not to be divided after the death of the father."

With which the bearded muzhik eagerly recounted the history of
the murder done by the brother, the nephew, and a son, while the
spruce, spare, well-dressed peasant interlarded the general buzz
of conversation with words and comments cheerfully and
stridently delivered, much as though he were driving in stakes
for the erection of a fence.

"Every man is drawn most in the direction whither he finds it
easiest to go."

"Then it will be the Devil that will be drawing him, since the
direction of Hell is always the easiest."

"Well, YOU will not be going that way, I suppose? You don't
altogether fancy it?"

"Why should I?"

"Because you have declared it to be the easiest way."

"Well, I am not a saint."

"No, ha-ha! you are not."

"And you mean that--?"

"I mean nothing. If a dog's chain be short, he is not to be
blamed."

Whereupon, setting nose to nose, the pair plunged into a quarrel
still more heated as they expounded in simple, but often
curiously apposite, language opinions intelligible to themselves
alone. The one peasant, a lean fellow with lengthy limbs, cold,
sarcastic eyes, and a dark, bony countenance, spoke loudly and
sonorously, with frequent shrugs of the shoulders, while the
other peasant, a man stout and broad of build who until now had
seemed calm, self-assured of demeanour, and a man of settled
views, breathed heavily, while his oxlike eyes glowed with an
ardour causing his face to flush patchily, and his beard to
stick out from his chin.

"Look here, for instance," he growled as he gesticulated and
rolled his dull eyes about. "How can that be? Does not even God
know wherein a man ought to restrain himself?"

"If the Devil be one's master, God doesn't come into the
matter."

"Liar! For who was the first who raised his hand against his
fellow?"

"Cain."

"And the first man who repented of a sin? "

"Adam."

"Ah! You see!"

Here there broke into the dispute a shout of: "They are just
getting him aboard!" and the crowd, rushing away from the
stern, carried with it the two disputants--the sparer peasant;
lowering his shoulders, and buttoning up his jacket as he went;
while the bearded peasant, following at his heels, thrust his
head forward in a surly manner as he shifted his cap from the
one ear to the other.

With a ponderous beating of paddles against the current the
steamer heaved to, and the captain shouted through a
speaking-trumpet, with a view to preventing a collision between
the barge and the stem of the vessel:

"Put her over! Put her o-o-ove-r!"

Soon the fishing-boat came alongside, and the half-drowned man,
with a form as limp as a half-empty sack, and water exuding from
every stitch, and his hitherto haggard face grown smooth and
simple-looking, was hoisted on board.

Next, on the sailors laying him upon the hatchway of the baggage
hold, he sat up, leaned forward, smoothed his wet hair with the
palms of his hands, and asked dully, without looking at anyone:

"Have they also recovered my cap?"

Someone among the throng around him exclaimed reprovingly:

"It is not about your cap that you ought to be thinking, but
about your soul."

Upon this he hiccuped loudly and freely, like a camel, and
emitted a stream of turgid water from his mouth. Then, looking
at the crowd with lack-lustre eyes, he said in an apathetic tone:

"Let me be taken elsewhere."

In answer, the boatswain sternly bade him stretch himself out,
and this the young fellow did, with his hands clasped under his
head, and his eyes closed, while the boatswain added brusquely
to the onlookers:

"Move away, move away, good people. What is there to stare at?
This is not a show. . . . Hi, you muzhik! Why did you play us
such a trick, damn you?"

The crowd however, was not to be suppressed, but indulged in
comments.

"He murdered his father, didn't he?"

"What? THAT wretched creature?"

As for the boatswain, he squatted upon his heels, and proceeded
to subject the rescued man to a course of strict interrogation.

"What is the destination marked on your ticket?"

"Perm."

"Then you ought to leave the boat at Kazan. And what is your
name?"

"Yakov."

"And your surname?"

"Bashkin--though we are known also as the Bukolov family."

"Your family has a DOUBLE surname, then?"

With the full power of his trumpet-like lungs the bearded
peasant (evidently he had lost his temper) broke in:

"Though his uncle and his brother have been sentenced to penal
servitude and are travelling together on that barge, he--well,
he has received his discharge! That is only a personal matter,
however. In spite of what judges may say, one ought never to
kill, since conscience cannot bear the thought of blood. Even
nearly to become a murderer is wrong."

By this time more and more passengers had collected as they awakened from sleep and emerged from the first- and
second-class cabins. Among them was the mate, a man with
a black moustache and rubicund features who inquired of
someone amid the confusion: "You are not a doctor, I suppose?"
and received the astonished, high-pitched reply: "No,
sir, nor ever have been one."

To this someone added with a drawl:

"Why is a doctor needed? Surely the man is a fellow of no
particular importance?"

Over the river the radiance of the summer daylight had gathered
increased strength, and, since the date was a Sunday, bells were
sounding seductively from a hill, and a couple of women in gala
apparel who were following the margin of the river waved
handkerchiefs towards the steamer, and shouted some greeting.

Meanwhile the young fellow lay motionless, with his eyes closed.
Divested of his pea-jacket, and wrapped about with wet, clinging
underclothing, he looked more symmetrical than previously--his
chest seemed better developed, his body plumper, and his face
more rotund and less ugly.

Yet though the passengers gazed at him with compassion or
distaste or severity or fear, as the case might be, all did so
without ceremony, as though he had not been a
living man at all.

For instance, a gaunt gentleman in a grey frock-coat said to a
lady in a yellow straw hat adorned with a pink ribbon:

"At our place, in Riazan, when a certain master-watchmaker went
and hanged himself to a ventilator, he first of all stopped
every watch and clock in his shop. Now, the question is, why did
he stop them?"

"An abnormal case indeed!"

On the other hand, a dark-browed woman who had her hands hidden
beneath her shawl stood gazing at the rescued man in silence,
and with her side turned towards him. As she did so tears were
welling in her grey-blue eyes.

Presently two sailors appeared. One of them bent over the young
fellow, touched him on the shoulder, and said:

"Hi! You are to get up."

Whereupon the young fellow rose, and was removed elsewhither.

**********************************

When, after an interval, he reappeared on deck, he was clean and
dry, and clad in a cook's white jumper and a sailor's blue serge
trousers. Clasping his hands behind his back, hunching his
shoulders, and bending his head forward, he walked swiftly to
the stern, with a throng of idlers--at first one by one, and then
in parties of from three to a dozen--following in his wake.

The man seated himself upon a coil of rope, and, craning his
neck in wolf-like fashion to eye the bystanders, frowned, let
fall his temples upon hands thrust into his flaxen hair, and
fixed his gaze upon the barge.

Standing or sitting about in the hot sunshine, people stared at
him without stint. Evidently they would have liked, but did not
dare, to engage him in conversation. Presently the big peasant
also arrived on the scene, and, after glancing at all present,
took off his hat, and wiped his perspiring face. Next, a
grey-headed old man with a red nose, a thin wisp of beard, and
watery eyes cleared his throat, and in honeyed tones took the
initiative.

"Would you mind telling us how it all happened?" he began.

"Why should I do so?" retorted the young fellow without moving.

Taking a red handkerchief from his bosom, the old man shook it
out and applied it cautiously to his eyes. Then he said through
its folds in the quiet accents of a man who is determined to
persevere:

"Why, you say? For the reason that the occasion is one when all
ought to know the tru--"

Lurching forward, the bearded peasant interposed with a rasp:

"Yes, do you tell us all about it, and things will become
easier for you. For a sin always needs to be made known."

While, like an echo, a voice said in bold and sarcastic accents:

"It would be better to seize him and tie him up."

Upon this the young fellow raised his brows a little, and
retorted in an undertone:

"Let me bide."

"The rascal!" the crowd commented, while the old man, neatly
folding and replacing his handkerchief, raised a hand as dry as
a cock's leg, and remarked with a sharp, knowing smile:

"Possibly it is not merely out of idle curiosity that folk are
making this request."

"Go and be damned to you!" the young fellow exclaimed with a
grim snap. Whereupon the big peasant bellowed out in a blustering fashion:

"What? Then you will not tell us at least your destination?"

Whereafter the same speaker continued to hold forth on humanity,
God, and the human conscience--staring wildly around him as he
did so, waving his arms about, and growing ever more
frantic, until really it was curious to watch him.

At length the crowd grew similarly excited, and took to
encouraging the speaker with cries of "True! That is so!"

As for the young fellow, he listened awhile in silence, without
moving. Then, straightening his back, he rose, thrust his hands
into the pockets of his trousers, and, swaying his body to and
fro, began to glare at the crowd with greenish eyes which were
manifestly lightening to a vicious gleam. At length, thrusting
forth his chest, he cried hoarsely:

"So you ask me whither I am bound? I am bound for the
brigands' lair, for the brigands' lair, where, unless you first
take and put me in fetters, I intend to cut the throat of every
man that I meet. Yes, a hundred murders will I commit, for all
folk will be the same to me, and not a soul will I spare. Aye,
the end of my tether is reached, so take and fetter me whilst
you can."

His breath was issuing with difficulty, and as he spoke his
shoulders heaved, and his legs trembled beneath him. Also, his
face had turned grey and become distorted with tremors.

Upon this, the crowd broke into a gruff, ugly, resentful roar,
and edged away from the man. Yet, in doing so, many of its
members looked curiously like the man himself in the way that
they lowered their heads, caught at their breath, and let their
eyes flash. Clearly the man was in imminent danger of being
assaulted.

Suddenly he recovered his subdued demeanour--he, as it were,
thawed in the sunlight: until, as suddenly, his legs gave way
beneath him, and, narrowly escaping injury to his face from the
corner of a bale, he fell forward upon his knees as though
felled with an axe. Thereafter, clutching at his throat, he
shouted in a strange voice, and crowding the words upon one
another:

"Tell me what I am to do. Is all of it my fault? Long I lay in
prison before I was tried and told to go free... yet--"

Tearing at his ears and cheeks, he rocked his head to and fro as
though seeking to rend it from its socket. Then he continued:

"Yet I am NOT free. Nor is it in my power to say what will
become of me. For me there remains neither life nor death."

"Aha!" exclaimed the big peasant; and at the sound the crowd
drew back as in consternation, while some hastened to depart
altogether. As for the remainder (numbering a dozen or so), they
herded sullenly, nervously, involuntarily into a mass as the young
fellow continued in distracted tones and with a trembling head:

"Oh that I could sleep for the next ten years! For then could I
prove myself, and decide whether I am guilty or not. Last night
I struck a man with a faggot. As I was walking about I saw
asleep a man who had angered me, and thereupon thought, 'Come! I
should like to deal him a blow, but can I actually do it?' And
strike him I did. Was it my fault? Always I keep asking myself,
'Can I, or can I not, do a thing?' Aye, lost, lost am I!"

Apparently this outburst caused the man to reach the end of his
power, for presently he sank from knees to heels--then on to his
side, with hands clasping his head, and his tongue finally
uttering the words, "Better had you kill me!"

A hush fell, for all now stood confounded and silent, with,
about them, a greyer, a more subdued, look which made all more
resemble their fellows. In fact, to all had the atmosphere
become oppressive, as though everyone's breast had had clamped
into it a large, soft clod of humid, viscid earth. Until at last
someone said in a low, shamefaced, but friendly, tone:

"Good brother, we are not your judges."

To which someone else added with an equal measure of gentleness:

"Indeed, we may be no better than you."

"We pity you, but we must not judge you. Only pity is
permitted."

As for the well-dressed peasant, his loud, triumphant utterance
was:

"Let God judge him, but men suffer him. Of judging of one
another there has been enough."

And a fifth man remarked to a friend as he walked away:

"What are we to make of this? To judge by the book, the young
fellow is at once guilty and not guilty."

"Bygones ought to be bygones. Of all courses that is the best."

"Yes, for we are too quick. What good can that do?"

"Aye, what?"

At length the dark-browed woman stepped forward. Letting her
shawl to her shoulders, straightening hair streaked with grey
under a bright blue scarf, and deftly putting aside a skirt she
so seated herself beside the young fellow as to screen from the
crowd with the height of her figure. Then, raising kindly face,
she said civilly, but authoritatively, to the bystanders:

"Do all of you go away."

Whereupon the crowd began to depart,the big peasant saying as he
went:

"There! Just as I foretold has the matter turned out.
Conscience HAS asserted itself."

Yet the words were spoken without self-complacency, rather,
thoughtfully, and with a sense of awe.

As for the red-nosed old man who was walking like a shadow
behind the last speaker, he opened his snuff-box, peered therein
with his moist eyes, and drawled to no one in particular:

"How often does one see a man play with conscience, yes, even
though he be a rogue! He erects that conscience as a screen to
his knaveries and tricks and wiles, and masks the whole with a
cloud of words. Yes, we know how it is done, even though folk
may stare at him, and say to one another, 'How fervently his
soul is glowing!' Aye, all the time that he is holding his hand
to his heart he will be dipping the other hand into your pocket."

The lover of proverbs, for his part, unbuttoned his jacket,
thrust his hands under his coat-tails, and said in a loud voice:

"There is a saying that you can trust any wild beast, such as a
fox or a hedgehog or a toad, but not--"

"Quite so, dear sir. The common folk are exceedingly
degenerate."

"Well, they are not developing as they ought to do."

"No, they are over-cramped," was the big peasant's rasped-out
comment. "They have no room for GROWTH."

"Yes, they DO grow, but only as regards beard and moustache, as
a tree grows to branch and sap."

With a glance at the purveyor of proverbs the old man assented
by remarking: "Yes, true it is that the common folk are
cramped." Whereafter he thrust a pinch of snuff into his
nostrils, and threw back his head in anticipation of the sneeze
which failed to come. At length, drawing a deep breath through
his parted lips, he said as he measured the peasant again with
his eyes:

"My friend, you are of a sort calculated to last."

In answer the peasant nodded.

"SOME day," he remarked, "we shall get what we want."

In front of us now, was Kazan, with the pinnacles of its
churches and mosques piercing the blue sky, and looking like
garlands of exotic blooms. Around them lay the grey wall of the
Kremlin, and above them soared the grim Tower of Sumbek.

Here one and all were due to disembark.

I glanced towards the stern once more. The dark-browed woman was
breaking off morsels from a wheaten scone that was lying in her
lap, and saying as she did so:

"Presently we will have a cup of tea, and then keep together as
far as Christopol."

In response the young fellow edged nearer to her, and
thoughtfully eyed the large hands which, though inured to hard
work, could also be very gentle.

"I have been trodden upon," he said.

"Trodden upon by whom?"

"By all. And I am afraid of them."

"Why so?"

"Because I am."

Breathing upon a morsel of the scone, the woman offered it him
with the quiet words:

"You have had much to bear. Now, shall I tell you my history,
or shall we first have tea? "

******************************

On the bank there was now to be seen the frontage of the gay,
wealthy suburb of Uslon, with its brightly-dressed,
rainbow-tinted women and girls tripping through the streets, and
the water of its foaming river sparkling hotly, yet dimly, in
the sunlight.

It was a scene like a scene beheld in a vision.



A WOMAN

The wind is scudding over the steppe, and beating upon the
rampart of the Caucasian heights until their backbone seems to be
bellying like a huge sail, and the earth to be whirling and
whizzing through unfathomable depths of blue, and leaving behind
it a rack of wind-torn clouds which, as their shadows glide over
the surface of the land, seem ever to be striving to keep in
touch with the onrush of the gale, and, failing to maintain the
effort, dissolving in tears and despondency.

The trees too are bending in the attitude of flight--their boughs
are brandishing their foliage as a dog worries a fleece, and
littering the black soil with leaves among which runs a constant
querulous hissing and rustling. Also, storks are uttering their
snapping cry, sleek rooks cawing, steppe grasshoppers maintaining
their tireless chirp, sturdy, well-grown husbandmen uttering
shouts like words of command, the threshing-floors of the
rolling steppe diffusing a rain of golden chaff, and eddying
whirlwinds catching up stray poultry feathers, dried-onion
strips, and leaves yellowed with the heat, to send them dancing
again over the trim square of the little Cossack hamlet.

Similarly does the sun keep appearing and disappearing as though
he were pursuing the fugitive earth, and ever and anon halting
through weariness before his decline into the dark, shadowy vista
where the snowclad peaks of the western mountains are rearing
their heads, and fast-reddening clouds are reminding one of the
surface of a ploughed field.

At times those clouds part their bulk to reveal in blinding
splendour the silvery saddle of Mount Elburz, and the crystal
fangs of other peaks--all, apparently, striving to catch and
detain the scudding vapours. And to such a point does one come to
realise the earth's flight through space that one can scarcely
draw one's breath for the tension, the rapture, of the thought
that with the rush of that dear and beautiful earth oneself is
keeping pace towards, and ever tending towards, the region where,
behind the eternal, snow-clad peaks, there lies a boundless ocean
of blue--an ocean beside which there may lie stretched yet other
proud and marvellous lands, a void of azure amid which one may
come to descry far-distant, many-tinted spheres of planets as yet
unknown, but sisters, all, to this earth of ours.

Meanwhile from the steppe slow, ponderous grey oxen with sharp
horns are drawing an endless succession of wagon-loads of
threshed grain through rich, black, sootlike dust. Patiently the
beasts' round eyes regard the earth, while on the top of each
load there lolls a Cossack who, with face sunburnt to the last
pitch of swarthiness, and eyes reddened with exposure to the
wind, and beard matted, seemingly solidified, with dust and
sweat, is clad in a shirt drab with grime, and has a shaggy
Persian cap thrust to the back of his head. Occasionally, also,
he may he seen riding on the pole in front of his team, and being
buffeted from behind by the wind which inflates his shirt. And as
sleek and comfortable as the carcasses of the bullocks are these
Cossacks' frames in proportion their eyes are sluggishly
intelligent, and in their every movement is the deliberate air of
men who know precisely what they have to do.

"Tsob, tsobe!" such fellows shout to their teams. This year
they are reaping a splendid harvest.

Yet though these folk, one and all, look fat and prosperous,
their mien is dour, and they speak reluctantly, and through their
teeth. Possibly this is because they are over-weary with toil.
However that may be, the full-fed country people of the region
laugh but little, and seldom sing.

In the centre of the hamlet soars the red brick church of the
place--an edifice which, with its five pinnacles, its belfry over
its porch, and its yellow plaster window-mouldings, looks like an
edifice that has been fashioned of meat, and cemented with
grease. Nay, its very shadow seems so richly heavy as to be the
shadow of a fane erected by men endowed with a plethora of this
world's goods to a god otiose in his grandeur. Ranged around the
building in ring fashion, the hamlet's squat white huts stand
girdled with belts of plaited wattle, shawled in the gorgeous
silken scarves of gardens, and crowned with a flowered
brocadework of reed-thatched roofs. In fact, they resemble a bevy
of buxom babi, [Peasant women] as over and about them wave
silver poplar trees, with quivering, lacelike leaves of acacias,
and dark-leaved chestnuts (the leaves of the latter like the
palms of human hands) which rock to and fro as though they would
fain seize, and detain the driving clouds. Also, from court to
court scurry Cossack women who, with skirt-tails tucked up to
reveal muscular legs bare to the knee, are preparing to array
themselves for the morrow's festival, and, meanwhile, chattering
to one another, or shouting to plump infants which may be seen
bathing in the dust like sparrows, or picking up handfuls of
sand, and tossing them into the air.

Sheltered from the wind by the churchyard wall, there may be seen
also, as they sprawl on the dry, faded herbage, a score of "
strollers for work "that is to say, of folk who, a community
apart, consist of "nowhere people," of dreamers who live
constantly in expectation of some stroke of luck, some kindly
smile from fortune, and of wastrels who, intoxicated with the
abundant bounty of the opulent region, have fallen passive
victims to the Russian craze for vagrancy. These folk tramp from
hamlet to hamlet in parties of two or three, and, while
purporting to seek employment, merely contemplate that employment
lethargically, express astonishment at the plenitude which it
produces, and then decline to put their hands to toil save when
dire necessity renders it no longer possible to satisfy hunger's
pangs through the expedients of mendicancy and theft. Dull, or
cowed, or timid, or furtive of eye, these folk have lost all
sense of the difference between that which constitutes honesty
and that which does not.

The morrow being the Feast of the Assumption, these people have,
in the present instance, gathered from every quarter of the
country, for the reason that they hope to be provided with food
and drink without first being made to earn their entertainment.

For the most part they are Russians from the central provinces,
vagabonds whose faces are blackened, and heads blanched with the
unaccustomed sunshine of the South, but whose bodies are clad
merely in rags tossed and tumbled by the wind. True, the wearers
of those rags declare themselves to be peaceful, respectable
citizens whom toil and life's buffetings have exhausted, and
compelled to seek temporary rest and prayer; yet never does a
creaking, groaning, ponderous grain wagon, with its Cossack
driver, pass them by without their according the latter a humble,
obsequious salute as, with straw in mouth, and omitting, always,
to raise his cap, the man glances at them askance and with
contempt, or, more frequently, does not even descry these
tattered, grimy hulks between whom and himself there is
absolutely nothing in common.

Lower even, and more noticeably, more pretentiously, than the
rest does a certain " needy " native of Tula named Konev salute
each Cossack. A hardbitten muzhik as sunburnt as a stick of
ergot, he has a black beard distributed irregularly over a lean
face, a fawning smile, and eyes deep-sunken in their sockets.

Most of these persons I have met for the first time today; but
Konev is an old acquaintance of mine, for he and I have more than
once encountered one another on the road between Kursk and the
province of Ter. An "artelni," that is to say, a member of a
workman's union, he cultivates his fellows' good graces for the
reason that he is also an arrant coward, and accustomed,
everywhere save in his own village (which lies buried among the
sands of Alexin), to assert that:

"Certainly, this countryside is rich, yet I cannot hit things
off with its inhabitants. In my own part of the country folk are
more spiritual, more truly Russian, by far than here--they are
folk with whom the natives of this region are not to be compared,
since in the one locality the population has a human soul,
whereas in the other locality it is a flint-stone."

And with a certain quiet reflectiveness, he loves also to recount
a marvellous example of unlooked-for enrichment. He will say to
you:

"Maybe you do not believe in the virtue of horseshoes? Yet I
tell YOU that once, when a certain peasant of Efremov found a
horseshoe, the next three weeks saw it befall that that peasant's
uncle, a tradesman of Efremov, was burnt to death with all his
family, and the property devolved to the peasant. Did you ever
hear of such a thing? What is going to happen CANNOT be foretold,
for at any moment fortune may pity a man, and send him a
windfall."

As Konev says this his dark, pointed eyebrows will go shooting up
his forehead, and his eyes come protruding out of their sockets,
as though he himself cannot believe what he has just related.

Again, should a Cossack pass him without returning his salute, he
will mutter as he follows the man with his eyes:

"An overfed fellow, that--a fellow who can't even look at a human
being! The souls of these folk, I tell you, are withered."

On the present occasion he has arrived on the scene in company
with two women. One of them, aged about twenty, is gentle-
looking, plump, and glassy of eye, with a mouth perpetually half-
open, so that the face looks like that of an imbecile, and though
the exposed teeth of its lower portion may seem to be set in a
smile, you will perceive, should you peer into the motionless
eyes under the overhanging brows, that she has recently been
weeping in the terrified, hysterical fashion of a person of weak
intellect.

I have come here with that man and other strangers thus I heard
her narrate in low, querulous tones as with a stumpy finger she
rearranged the faded hair under her yellow and green scarf.

A fat-faced youth with high cheek-bones and the small eyes of a
Mongol here nudged her, and said carelessly:

"You mean, rather, that your own man has cast you off. Probably
he was the only man you ever saw."

"Aye," Konev drawled thoughtfully as he felt in his wallet.
Nowadays folk need think little of deserting a woman, since in
this year of grace women are no good at all."

Upon this the woman frowned--then blinked her eyes timidly, and
would have opened her lips to reply, but that her companion
interrupted her by saying in a brisk, incisive tone:

"Do not listen to those rascals!"

*****************************

The woman's companion, some five or six years her senior, has a
face exceptional in the constant change and movement of its great
dark eyes as at one moment they withdraw themselves from the
street of the Cossack hamlet, to gaze fixedly and gravely towards
the steppe where it lies scoured with the scudding breeze, and at
another moment fall to scanning the faces of the persons around
her, and, at another, frown anxiously, or send a smile flitting
across her comely lips as she bends her head, until her features
are concealed. Next, the head is raised again, for the eyes have
taken on another phase, and become dilated with interest, while a
sharp furrow is forming between the slender eyebrows, and the
finely moulded lips and trim mouth have compressed themselves
together, and the thin nostrils of the straight nose are snuffing
the air like those of a horse.

In fact, in the woman there is something non-peasant in its
origin. For instance, let one but watch her sharply clicking feet
as, in walking, they peep from under her blue skirt, and one
will perceive that they are not the splayed feet of a villager,
but, rather, feet arched of instep, and at one time accustomed to
the wearing of boots. Or, as the woman sits engaged in
embroidering a blue bodice with a pattern of white peas, one will
perceive that she has long been accustomed to plying the needle
so dexterously; swiftly do the small, sunburnt hands fly in and
out under the tumbled material, eagerly though the wind may
strive to wrest it from her. Again, as she sits bending over her
work, one will descry through a rent in her bodice a small, firm
bosom which might almost have been that of a virgin, were it not
for the fact that a projecting teat proclaims that she is a woman
preparing to suckle an infant. In short, as she sits among her
companions she looks like a fragment of copper flung into the
midst of some rusty old scrap-iron.

Most of the people in whose society I wander neither rise to
great heights nor sink to great depths, but are as colourless as
dust, and wearisomely insignificant. Hence is it that whenever I
chance upon a person whose soul I can probe and explore for
thoughts unfamiliar to me and words not hitherto heard I
congratulate myself, seeing that though it is my desire to see
life grow more fair and exalted, and I yearn to bring about that
end, there constantly reveals itself to me merely a vista of
sharp angles and dark spaces and poor crushed, defrauded people.
Yes, never do I seek to project a spark of my own fire into the
darkness of my neighbour's soul but I see that spark disappear,
become lost, in a chaos of dumb vacuity.

Hence the woman of whom I have just spoken particularly excites
my fancy, and leads me to attempt divinations of her past, until
I find myself evolving a story which is not only of vast
complexity, but has got painted into it merely the colours of my
own hopes and aspirations. It is a story necessarily illusory,
necessarily bound to make life seem even worse than before. Yet
it is a grievous thing NEVER to distort actuality, NEVER to
envelop actuality in the wrappings of one's imagination . . . .

Closing his eyes, and picking his words with difficulty, a tall,
fair peasant drawls in thick, gluelike tones:

"'Very well,' I said: and off we set. On the way I said again:
'Gubin, though you may not like to be told so, you are no better
than a thief.'"

The o's uttered by this peasant are uniformly round and firm--they
roll forward as a cartwheel trundles along a hot, dusty country
road.

The youth with the high cheek-bones fixes the whites of his
porcine eyes (eyes the pupils of which are as indeterminate as
the eyes of a blind man) upon the woman in the green scarf.
Then, having, like a calf, plucked and chewed some stalks of the
withered grass, he rolls up the sleeves of his shirt, bends one
fist into the crook of the elbow, and says to Konev with a glance
at the well-developed muscle:

"Should you care to hit me?"

"No, you can hit yourself. Hit yourself over the head. Then,
perhaps, you'll grow wiser."

Stolidly the young fellow looks at Konev, and inquires:

"How do you know me to be a fool? "

"Because your personality tells me so."

"Eh?" cries the young fellow truculently as he raises himself
to a kneeling posture. "How know you what I am?"

"I have been told what you are by the Governor of your
province."

The young fellow opens his mouth, and stares at Konev. Then he
asks:

"To what province do I belong?"

"If you yourself have forgotten to what province you belong, you
had better try and loosen your wits."

"Look here. If I were to hit you, I--"

The woman who has been sewing drops her work to shrug one rounded
shoulder as though she were cold, and ask conciliatorily:

"Well, WHAT province do you belong to?"

"I? " the young fellow re-echoes as he subsides on to his heels.
"I belong to Penza. Why do you ask?"

"Oh never mind why."

Presently, with a strangely youthful laugh, the woman adds in a
murmur:

"I ask because I too belong to that province."

"And to which canton?"

"To that of Penza." In the woman's tone is a touch of pride.

The young fellow squats down before her, as before a wood fire,
stretches out his hands, and says in an ingratiating voice:

"What a fine place is our cantonal town! What churches and shops
and stone houses there are in it! In fact, one shop sells a
machine on which you can play anything you like, any sort of a
tune!"

"As well as, probably, the fool," comments Konev in an
undertone, though the young fellow is too enthralled with the
memory of the amenities of his cantonal capital to notice the
remark. Next, smacking his lips, and chewing his words, he
continues in a murmur:

"In those stone houses."

Here the woman drops her sewing a second time to inquire: "Is
there a convent there?"

"A convent?"

And the young fellow pauses uncouthly to scratch his neck. Only
after a while does he answer:

"A convent? Well, I do not know, for only once, to tell the
truth, have I been in the town, and that was when some of us
famine folk were set to a job of roadmaking."

"Well, well!" gasps Konev, as he rises and takes his departure.

The vagabonds, huddled against the churchyard wall, look like
litter driven thither by the steppe wind, and as liable to be
whirled away again whenever the wind shall choose. Three of the
party are sleeping, and the remainder either mending their
clothing, or killing fleas, or lethargically munching bread
collected at the windows of the Cossacks' huts. I find the sight
of them weary me as much as does the young fellows fatuous
babble. Also, I find that whenever the elder of the two women
lifts her eyes from her work, and half smiles, the faint half-
smile in question vexes me intensely. Consequently, I end by
departing in Konev's wake.

Guarding the entrance of the churchyard, four poplar trees stand
erect, save when, as the wind harries them, they bow alternately
to the arid, dusty earth and towards the dim vista of tow-
coloured steppe and snowcapped mountain peaks. Yet, oh how that
steppe, bathed in golden sunshine, draws one to itself and its
smooth desolation of sweet, dry grasses as the parched, fragrant
expanse rustles under the soughing wind!

"You ask about that woman, eh? " queries Konev, whom I find
leaning against one of the poplar trunks, and embracing it with
an arm.

"Yes. From where does she hail?"

"From Riazan, she says. Another story of hers is that her name
is Tatiana."

"Has she been with you long?"

"No. In fact, it was only this morning, some thirty versts from
here, that I overtook her and her companion. However, I have seen
her before, at Maikop-on-Laba, during the season of hay harvest,
when she had with her an elderly, smoothfaced muzhik who might
have been a soldier, and certainly was either her lover or an
uncle, as well as a bully and a drunkard of the type which,
before it has been two days in a place, starts about as many
brawls. At present, however, she is tramping with none but this
female companion, for, after that the 'uncle' had drunk away his
very belly-band and reins, he was clapped in gaol. The Cossack,
you know, is an awkward person to deal with."

Although Konev speaks without constraint, his eyes are fixed upon
the ground in a manner suggestive of some disturbing thought. And
as the breeze ruffles his dishevelled beard and ragged pea-jacket
it ends by robbing his head of his cap-- of the tattered, peakless
clout which, with rents in its lining, so closely resembles a
tchepchik [Woman's mob-cap], as to communicate to the
picturesque features of its wearer an appearance comically
feminine.

"Ye-es," expectorating, and drawling the words between his
teeth, he continues: "She is a remarkable woman, a regular, so
to speak, highstepper. Yet it must have been the Devil himself
that blew this young oaf with the bloated jowl on to the scene.
Otherwise I should soon have fixed up matters with her. The cur
that he is!"

"But once you told me that you had a wife already?"

Darting at me an angry glance, he turns away with a mutter of:

"AM I to carry my wife about with me in my wallet? "

Here there comes limping across the square a moustachioed
Cossack. In one hand he is holding a bunch of keys, and in the
other hand a battered Cossack cap, peak in front. Behind him,
sobbing and applying his knuckles to his eyes, there is creeping
a curly-headed urchin of eight, while the rear is brought up by a
shaggy dog whose dejected countenance and lowered tail would seem
to show that he too is in disgrace. Each time that the boy
whimpers more loudly than usual the Cossack halts, awaits the
lad's coming in silence, cuffs him over the head with the peak of
the cap, and, resuming his way with the gait of a drunken man,
leaves the boy and the dog standing where they are--the boy
lamenting, and the dog wagging its tail as its old black muzzle
sniffs the air. Somehow I discern in the dog's mien of holding
itself prepared for anything that may turn up, a certain
resemblance to Konev's bearing, save that the dog is older in
appearance than is the vagabond.

"You mentioned my wife, I think?" presently he resumes with a
sigh. "Yes, I know, but not EVERY malady proves mortal, and I
have been married nineteen years! "

The rest is well-known to me, for all too frequently have I heard
it and similar tales. Unfortunately, I cannot now take the
trouble to stop him; so once more I am forced to let his
complaints come oozing tediously into my ears.

"The wench was plump," says Konev, "and panting for love; so we
just got married, and brats began to come tumbling from her like
bugs from a bunk."

Subsiding a little, the breeze takes, as it were, to whispering.

"In fact, I could scarcely turn round for them. Even now seven
of them are alive, though originally the stud numbered thirteen.
And what was the use of such a gang? For, consider: my wife is
forty-two, and I am forty-three. She is elderly, and I am what
you behold. True, hitherto I have contrived to keep up my
spirits; yet poverty is wearing me down, and when, last winter,
my old woman went to pieces I set forth (for what else could I
do?) to tour the towns. In fact, folk like you and myself have
only one job available--the job of licking one's chops, and
keeping one's eyes open. Yet, to tell you the truth, I no sooner
perceive myself to be growing superfluous in a place than I spit
upon that place, and clear out of it."

Never to this sturdy, inveterate rascal does it seem to occur to
insinuate that he has been doing work of any kind, or that he in
the least cares to do any; while at the same time all self-pity
is eschewed in his narrative, and he relates his experiences much
as though they are the experiences of another man, and not of
himself.

Presently, as the Cossack and the boy draw level with us, the
former, fingering his moustache, inquires thickly:

"Whence are you come?"

"From Russia."

"All such folk come from there."

Thereafter, with a gesture of disdain, this man of the abnormally
broad nose, eyes floating in fat, and flaxen head shaped like a
flounder's, resumes his way towards the porch of the church. As
for the boy, he wipes his nose and follows him while the dog
sniffs at our legs, yawns, and stretches itself by the churchyard
wall.

"Did you see?" mutters Konev. "Oh yes, I tell you that the
folk here are far less amiable than our own folk in Russia. . .
But hark! What is that?"

To our ears there have come from behind the corner of the
churchyard wall a woman's scream and the sound of dull blows.
Rushing thither, we behold the fair-headed peasant seated on the
prostrate form of the young fellow from Penza, and methodically,
gruntingly delivering blow after blow upon the young fellow's
ears with his ponderous fists, while counting the blows as he
does so. Vainly, at the same time, the woman from Riazan is
prodding the assailant in the back, whilst her female companion
is shrieking, and the crowd at large has leapt to its feet, and,
collected into a knot, is shouting gleefully, "THAT'S the way!
THAT'S the way!"

"Five!" the fair-headed peasant counts.

"Why are you doing this?" the prostrate man protests.

"Six!"

"Oh dear!" ejaculates Konev, dancing with nervousness. "Oh
dear, oh dear!"

The smacking, smashing blows fall in regular cadence as, prone on
his face, the young fellow kicks, struggles and puffs up the
dust. Meanwhile a tall, dour man in a straw hat is rolling up a
shirt-sleeve, and alternately bending and stretching a long arm,
whilst a lithe, white-headed young stripling is hopping, sparrow-
like, from one onlooker to another, and exclaiming in suppressed,
cautious tones:

"Stop it, pray stop it, or we shall be arrested for creating a
disturbance!"

Presently the tall man strides towards the fair-headed peasant,
deals him a single blow which knocks him from the back of the
young fellow, and, turning to the crowd, says with an informing
air:

"THAT'S how we do it in Tambov!"

"Brutes! Villains!" screams the woman from Riazan, as she bends
over the young fellow. Her cheeks are livid, and as she wipes the
flushed face of the beaten youth with the hem of her gown, her
dark eyes are flashing with dry wrath, and her lips quivering so
painfully as to disclose a set of fine, level teeth.

Konev, pecking up to her, says with an air of advice:

"You had better take him away, and give him some water."

Upon this the fair-headed muzhik, rising to his knees, stretches
a fist towards the man from Tambov, and exclaims:

"Why should he have gone and bragged of his strength, pray?"

"Was that a good reason for thrashing him?"

"And who are you?"

"Who am I?"

"Yes, who are YOU?"

"Never mind. See that I don't give you another swipe!"

Upon this the onlookers plunge into a heated debate as to who
was actually the beginner of the disturbance, while the lithe
young fellow continues to wring his hands, and cry imploringly:

"DON'T make so much noise about it! Remember that we are in a
strange land, and that the folk hereabouts are strict."

So queerly do his ears project from his head that he would seem
to be able, if he pleased, to fold them right over his eyes.

Suddenly from the roseate heavens comes the vibrant note of a
bell; whereupon, the hubbub ceases and at the same moment a young
Cossack with a face studded with freckles, and, in his hands, a
cudgel, makes his appearance among the crowd.

"What does all this mean?" he inquires not uncivilly.

"They have been beating a man," the woman from Riazan replies.
As she does so she looks comely in spite of her wrath.

The Cossack glances at her--then smiles.

"And where is the party going to sleep?" he inquires of the
crowd.

"Here," someone ventures.

"Then you must not--someone might break into the church. Go,
rather, to the Ataman [Cossack headman or mayor], and you will
be billeted among the huts."

"It is a matter of no consequence," Konev remarks as he paces
beside me. "Yet--"

"They seem to be taking us for robbers," is my interruption.

"As is everywhere the way," he comments. "It is but one thing
more laid to our charge. Caution decides always that a stranger
is a thief."

In front of us walks the woman from Riazan, in company with the
young fellow of the bloated features. He is downcast of mien, and
at length mutters something which I cannot catch, but in answer
to which she tosses her head, and says in a distinct, maternal
tone:

"You are too young to associate with such brutes."

The bell of the church is slowly beating, and from the huts there
keep coming neat old men and women who make the hitherto deserted
street assume a brisk appearance, and the squat huts take on a
welcoming air.

In a resonant, girlish voice there meets our ears:

"Ma-am! Ma-amka! Where is the key of the green box? I want my
ribands!"

While in answer to the bell's summons, the oxen low a deep echo.

The wind has fallen, but reddish clouds still are gliding over
the hamlet, and the mountain peaks blushing until they seem,
thawing, to be sending streams of golden, liquid fire on to the
steppes, where, as though cast in stone, a stork, standing on one
leg, is listening, seemingly, to the rustling of the heat-
exhausted herbage.

**************************

In the forecourt of the Ataman's hut we are deprived of our
passports, while two of our number, found to be without such
documents, are led away to a night's lodging in a dark storehouse
in a corner of the premises. Everything is executed quietly
enough, and without the least fuss, purely as a matter of
routine; yet Konev mutters, as dejectedly he contemplates the
darkening sky:

"What a surprising thing, to be sure!"

"What is?"

"A passport. Surely a decent, peaceable man ought to be able to
travel WITHOUT a passport? So long as he be harmless, let him--"

"You are not harmless," with angry emphasis the woman from
Riazan interposes.

Konev closes his eyes with a smile, and says nothing more.

Almost until the vigil service is over are we kept kicking our
heels about that forecourt, like sheep in a slaughter-house. Then
Konev, myself, the two women, and the fat-faced young fellow are
led away towards the outskirts of the village, and allotted an
empty hut with broken-down walls and a cracked window.

"No going out will be permitted," says the Cossack who has
conducted us thither. "Else you will be arrested."

"Then give us a morsel of bread," Konev says with a stammer.
"Have you done any work here?" the Cossack inquires.

"Yes--a little."

"For me?"

"No. It did not so happen."

"When it does so happen I will give you some bread."

And like a water-butt the fat kindly-looking man goes rolling out
of the yard.

"What else was to be expected?" grumbles Konev with his
eyebrows elevated to the middle of his forehead. "The folk
hereabouts are knaves. Ah, well!"

As for the women, they withdraw to the darkest corner of the hut,
and lie down, while the young fellow disappears after probing the
walls and floor, and returns with an armful of straw which he
strews upon the hard, beaten clay. Then he stretches himself
thereon with hands clasped behind his battered head.

"See the resourcefulness of that fellow from Penza!" comments
Konev enviously. "Hi, you women! There is, it would seem, some
straw about."

To this comes from the women's corner the acid reply:

"Then go and fetch some."

"For you?"

"Yes, for us."

"Then I must, I suppose."

Nevertheless Konev merely remains sitting on the windowsill, and
discoursing on the subject of certain needy folk who do but
desire to go and say their prayers in church, yet are banded into
barns.

"Yes, and though you may say that folk, the world over, have a
soul in common, I tell you that this is not so--that, on the
contrary, we Russian strangers find it a hard matter here to get
looked upon as respectable."

With which he slips out quietly into the street, and disappears
from view.

The young fellow's sleep is restless--he keeps tossing about, with
his fat arms and legs sprawling over the floor, and grunting, and
snoring. Under him the straw makes a crackling sound, while the
two women whisper together in the darkness, and the reeds of the
dry thatch on the roof rustle (the wind is still drawing an
occasional breath), and ever and anon a twig brushes against an
outside wall. The scene is like a scene in a dream.

Out of doors the myriad tongues of the pitch-black, starless
night seem to be debating something in soft, sad, pitiful tones
which ever keep growing fainter; until, when the hour of ten has
been struck on the watchman's gong, and the metal ceases to
vibrate, the world grows quieter still, much as though all living
things, alarmed by the clang in the night, have concealed
themselves in the invisible earth or the equally invisible
heavens.

I seat myself by the window, and watch how the earth keeps
exhaling darkness, and the darkness enveloping, drowning the
grey, blurred huts in black, tepid vapour, though the church
remains invisible--evidently something stands interposed between
it and my viewpoint. And it seems to me that the wind, the seraph
of many pinions which has spent three days in harrying the land,
must now have whirled the earth into a blackness, a denseness, in
which, exhausted, and panting, and scarcely moving, it is
helplessly striving to remain within the encompassing, all-
pervading obscurity where, helpless and weary in like degree, the
wind has sloughed its thousands of wing-feathers--feathers white
and blue and golden of tint, but also broken, and smeared with
dust and blood.

And as I think of our petty, grievous human life, as of a
drunkard's tune on a sorry musical instrument, or as of a
beautiful song spoilt by a witless, voiceless singer, there
begins to wail in my soul an insatiable longing to breathe forth
words of sympathy with all mankind, words of burning love for all
the world, words of appreciation of, for example, the sun's
beauty as, enfolding the earth in his beams, and caressing and
fertilising her, he bears her through the expanses of blue. Yes,
I yearn to recite to my fellow-men words which shall raise their
heads. And at length I find myself compounding the following
jejune lines:

To our land we all are born
In happiness to dwell.
The sun has bred us to this land
Its fairness to excel.
In the temple of the sun
We high priests are, divine.
Then each of us should claim his life,
And cry, " This life is mine!"

Meanwhile from the women's corner there comes a soft,
intermittent whispering; and as it continues to filter through
the darkness, I strain my ears until I succeed in catching a few
of the words uttered, and can distinguish at least the voices of
the whisperers.

The woman from Riazan mutters firmly, and with assurance:

"Never ought you to show that it hurts you."

And with a sniff, in a tone of dubious acquiescence, her
companion replies:

"Ye-es-so long as one can bear it."

"Ah, but never mind. PRETEND. That is to say, when he beats you,
make light of it, and treat it as a joke."

"But what if he beats me very much indeed?"

"Continue still to make light of it, still to smile at him
kindly."

"Well, YOU can never have been beaten, for you do not seem to
know what it is like."

"Oh, but I have, my dear--I do know what it is like, for my
experience of it has been large. Do not be afraid, however. HE
won't beat you."

A dog yelps, pauses a moment to listen, and then barks more
angrily than ever. Upon that other dogs reply, and for a moment
or two I am annoyed to find that I cannot overhear the women's
conversation. In time, however, the dogs cease their uproar, for
want of breath, and the suppressed dialogue filters once more to
my ears.

"Never forget, my dear, that a muzhik's life is a hard one. Yes,
for us plain folk life is hard. Hence, one ought to make nothing
of things, and let them come easy to one."

"Mother of God!"

"And particularly should a woman so face things; for upon her
everything depends. For one thing, let her take to herself, in
place of her mother, a husband or a sweetheart. Yes, try that,
and see. And though, at first, your husband may find fault with
you, he will afterwards take to boasting to other muzhiks that he
has a wife who can do everything, and remain ever as bright and
loving as the month of May. Never does she give in; never WOULD
she give in--no, not if you were to cut off her head!"

"Indeed? "

"Yes. And see if that will not come to be your opinion as much
as mine."

Again, to my annoyance, the dialogue is interrupted--this time by
the sound of uncertain footsteps in the street without. Thus the
next words of the women's conversation escape me. Then I hear:

"Have you ever read 'The Vision of the Mother of God'?"

"N-no, I have not."

"Then you had better ask some older woman than myself to tell
you about it, for it is a good book to become acquainted with.
Can you read?"

"No, I cannot. But tell me, yourself, what the vision was?"

"Listen, and I will do so."

From outside the window Konev's voice softly inquires:

"Is that our lot in there? Yes? Thank God, then, for I had
nearly lost my way after stirring up a lot of dogs, and being
forced to use my fists upon them. Here, you! Catch hold!"

With which, handing me a large watermelon, he clambers through
the window with a great clattering and disturbance.

"I have managed also to gee a good supply of bread," he
continues. "Perhaps you believe that I stole it? But no. Indeed,
why should one steal when one can beg-a game at which I am
particularly an old hand, seeing that always, on any  occasion, I
can make up to people? It happened like this. When I went out I
saw a fire glowing in a hut, and folk seated at supper. And
since, wherever many people are present, one of them at least has
a kind heart, I ate and drank my fill, and then managed to make
off with provender for you as well. Hi, you women!"

There follows no answer.

"I believe those daughters of whores must be asleep," he
comments. "Hi, women!"

"What is it?" drily inquires the woman from Riazan.

"Should you like a taste of water-melon?"

"I should, thank you."

Thereupon, Konev begins to make his way towards the voice.

"Yes, bread, soft wheaten bread such as you--"

Here the, other woman whines in beggar fashion:

"And give ME a taste, too."

"Oh, yes, I will. But where the devil are you?"

"And a taste of melon as well?"

"Yes, certainly. Hullo! Who is this?"

From the woman from Riazan comes a cry of pain.

"Mind how you step, wretch!" she exclaims.

"All right, but you needn't make so much noise about it. You see
how dark it is, and I--"

"You ought to have struck a match, then."

"I possess but a quarter of a match, for matches are not over-
plentiful, and even if I did catch hold of you no great harm can
have been done. For instance, when your husband used to beat you
he must have hurt you far worse than I. By the way, DID he beat
you?"

"What business is that of yours?"

"None; only, I am curious to know. Surely a woman like you--"

"See here. Do not dare to touch me, or I--"

"Or you what?"

There ensues a prolonged altercation amid which I can hear
epithets of increasing acerbity and opprobrium being applied;
until the woman from Riazan exclaims hoarsely:

"Oh, you coward of a man, take that!"

Whereupon follows a scrimmage amid which I can distinguish
slappings, gross chuckles from Konev, and a muffled cry from the
younger woman of:

"Oh, do not so behave, you wretch!"

Striking a match, I approach the spot, and pull Konev away. He is
in no way abashed, but merely cooled in his ardour as, seated on
the floor at my feet, and panting and expectorating, he says
reprovingly to the woman:

"When folk wish merely to have a game with you, you ought not to
let yourself lose your temper. Fie, fie!"

"Are you hurt?" the woman inquires quietly.

"What do you suppose? You have cut my lip, but that is the worst
damage."

"Then if you come here again I will lay the whole of your face
open."

"Vixen! What bumpkinish stupidity!"

Konev turns to myself.

"And as for you, you go catching at the first thing you find,
and have torn my coat."

"Then do not insult people."

"INSULT people, fool? The idea of anyone insulting a woman like
THAT!"

Whereafter, with a mean chuckle, the fellow goes on to discourse
upon the ease with which peasant women err, and upon their love
of deceiving their husbands.

"The impudent rascal!" comments the woman from Penza sleepily.

After a while the young fellow springs to his feet, and grates
his teeth. Then, reseating himself, and clutching at his head, he
says gloomily:

"I intend to leave here tomorrow, and go home. I do not care
WHAT becomes of me."

With which he subsides on to the floor as though exhausted.

"The blockhead!" is Konev's remark.

Amid the darkness a black shape rises. It does so as soundlessly
as a fish in a pond, glides to the door, and disappears.

"That was she," remarks Konev. "What a strong woman! However, if
you had not pulled me away, I should have got the better of her.
By God I should!"

"Then follow her, and make another attempt."

"No," after a moment's reflection he rejoins. "Out there she
might get hold of a stick, or a brick, or some such thing.
However, I'LL get even with her. As a matter of fact, you wasted
your time in stopping me, for she detests me like the very
devil."

And he renews his wearisome boastings of his conquests; until
suddenly, he stops as though he has swallowed his tongue.

All becomes quiet; everything seems to have come to a halt, and
to be pressing close in sleep to the motionless earth. I too grow
drowsy, and have a vision amid which my mind returns to the
donations which I have received that day, and sees them swell and
multiply and increase in weight until I feel their bulk pressing
upon me like a tumulus of the steppes. Next, the coppery notes of
a bell jar in my ears, and, struck at random intervals, go
floating away into the darkness.

It is the hour of midnight.

Soon, scattered drops of rain begin to patter down upon the dry
thatch of the hut and the dust in the street outside, while a
cricket continues chirping as though it were hurriedly relating
a tale. Also, I hear filtering forth into the darkness a softly
gulped, eager whispering.

"Think," says one of the voices, " what it must mean to have to
go tramping about without work, or only with work for another to
do!"

The young fellow who has been so soundly thrashed replies in a
dull voice:

"I know nothing of you."

"More softly, more softly!" urges the woman.

"What is it you want?"

"I want NOTHING. It is merely that I am sorry for you as a man
yet young and strong. You see--well, I have not lived with my eyes
shut. That is why I say, come with me."

"But come whither?"

"To the coast, where I know there to be beautiful plots of land
for the asking. You yourself can see how good the land hereabout
is. Well, there land better still is to be obtained."

"Liar!"

"More softly, more softly!" again urges the woman. "Moreover,
I am not bad-looking, and can manage things well, and do any sort
of work. Hence you and I might live quite peacefully and happily,
and come, eventually, to have a place of our own. Yes, and I
could bear and rear you a child. Only see how fit I am. Only feel
this breast of mine."

The young fellow snorts, and I begin to find the situation
oppressive, and to long to let the couple know that I am not
asleep. Curiosity, however, prevents me, and I continue listening
to the strange, arresting dialogue.

"Wait a little," whispers the woman with a gasp. "Do not play
with me, for I am not that sort of woman. Yes, I mean what I say.
Let be!"

Rudely, roughly the young fellow replies:

"Then don't run after me. A woman who runs after a man, and
plays the whore with him, is--"

"Less noise, please--less noise, I beg of you, or we shall be
heard, and I shall be put to shame!"

"Doesn't it put you to shame to be offering yourself to me like
this?"

A silence ensues, save that the young fellow goes on snorting and
fidgeting, and the raindrops continue to fall with the same
reluctance, the same indolence, as ever. Then once more the
woman's voice is heard through the pattering.

"Perhaps," says the voice, "you have guessed that I am seeking
a husband? Yes, I AM seeking one--a good, steady muzhik."

"But I am NOT a good, steady muzhik."

"Fie, fie!"

"What?" he sniggers. "A husband for you? The impudence of you!
A 'husband'! Go along!"

"Listen to me. I am tired of tramping."

"Then go home."

This time there ensues a long pause. Then the woman says very
softly:

"I have neither home nor kindred."

"A lie!" ejaculates the young fellow.

"No, by God it is not a lie! The Mother of God forget me if it
is."

In these last words I can detect the note of tears. By this time
the situation has become intolerable, for I am yearning to rise
and kick the young fellow out of the hut, and then to have a long
and earnest talk with his companion. "Oh that I could take her
to my arms," I reflect, "and cherish her as I would a poor lost
child!"

After a while the sounds of a new struggle between the pair are
heard.

"Don't put me off like that!" growls the young fellow.

"And don't you make any attempt upon me! I am not the sort of
woman to be forced."

The next moment there arises a cry of pain and astonishment.

"What was that for? What was that for?" the woman wails.

With an answering exclamation I spring to my feet, for my
feelings have become those of a wild beast.

At once everything grows quiet again, save that someone, crawls
over the floor and, in leaving the hut, jars the latch of the
crazy, single-hinged portal.

"It was not my fault," grumbles the young fellow. "It all came
of that stinking woman offering herself to me. Besides, the place
is full of bugs, and I cannot sleep."

"Beast!" pants someone in the vicinity.

"Hold your tongue, bitch!" is the fellow's retort.

By now the rain has ceased, and such air as filters through the
window seems increasedly stifling. Momentarily the hush grows
deeper, until the breast feels filled with a sense of oppression,
and the face and eyes as though they were glued over with a web.
Even when I step into the yard I find the place to be like a
cellar on a summer's day, when the very ice has melted in the
dark retreat, and the latter's black cavity is charged with hot,
viscous humidity.

Somewhere near me a woman is gulping out sobs. For a moment or
two I listen; then I approach her, and come upon her seated in a
corner with her head in her hands, and her body rocking to and
fro as though she were doing me obeisance.

Yet I feel angry, somehow, and remain standing before her without
speaking-- until at length I ask:

"Are you mad?"

"Go away," is, after a pause, her only reply.

"I heard all that you said to that young fellow."

"Oh, did you? Then what business is it of yours? Are you my
brother?"

Yet she speaks the words absent-mindedly rather than angrily.
Around us the dim, blurred walls are peering in our direction
with sightless eyes, while in the vicinity a bullock is drawing
deep breaths.

I seat myself by her side.

"Should you remain much longer in that position," I remark, "you
will have a headache."

There follows no reply.

"Am I disturbing you? " I continue.

"Oh no; not at all." And, lowering her hands, she looks at me.
"Whence do you come?"

"From Nizhni Novgorod."

"Oh, from a long way off!"

"Do you care for that young fellow?"

Not for a moment or two does she answer; and when she does so she
answers as though the words have been rehearsed.

"Not particularly. It is that he is a strong young fellow who
has lost his way, and is too much of a fool (as you too must have
seen) to find it again. So I am very sorry for him. A good muzhik
ought to be well placed."

On the bell of the church there strikes the hour of two. Without
interrupting herself, the woman crosses her breast at each
stroke.

"Always," she continues, "I feel sorry when I see a fine young
fellow going to the dogs. If I were able, I would take all such
young men, and restore them to the right road."

"Then you are not sorry FOR YOURSELF? "

"Not for myself? Oh yes, for myself as well."

"Then why flaunt yourself before this booby, as you have been
doing?"

"Because I might reform him. Do you not think so? Ah, you do not
know me."

A sigh escapes her.

"He hit you, I think?" I venture.

"No, he did not. And in any case you are not to touch him."

"Yet you cried out?"

Suddenly she leans towards me, and says:

"Yes, he did strike me--he struck me on the breast, and would
have overpowered me had it not been that I cannot, I will not, do
things heartlessly, like a cat. Oh, the brutes that men can be!"

Here the conversation undergoes an interruption through the fact
that someone has come out to the hut door, and is whistling
softly, as for a dog.

"There he is!" whispers the woman.

"Then had I not best send him about his business?"

"No, no!" she exclaims, catching at my knees. "No need is
there for that, no need is there for that!"

Then with a low moan she adds:

"Oh Lord, how I pity our folk and their lives! Oh God our Father!"

Her shoulders heave, and presently she bursts into tears, with a
whisper, between the pitiful sobs, of:

"How, on such a night as this, one remembers all that one has
ever seen, and the folk that ever one has known! And oh, how
wearisome, wearisome it all is! And how I should like to cry
throughout the world--But to cry what? I know not--I have no
message to deliver."

That feeling I can understand as well as she, for all too often
has it seemed to crush my soul with voiceless longing.

Then, as I stroke her bowed head and quivering shoulder, I ask
her who she is; and presently, on growing a little calmer, she
tells me the history of her life.

She is, it appears, the daughter of a carpenter and bee-keeper.
On her mother's death, this man married a young woman, and
allowed her, as stepmother, to persuade him to place the
narrator, Tatiana, in a convent, where she (Tatiana) lived from
the age of nine till adolescence, and, meanwhile, was taught her
letters, and also a certain amount of manual labour; until,
later, her father married her off to a friend of his, a well-to-
do ex-soldier, who was acting as forester on the convent's estate.

As the woman relates this, I feel vexed that I cannot see her
face--only a dim, round blur amid which there looms what appears
to be a pair of closed eyes. Also, so complete is the stillness,
that she can narrate her story in a barely audible whisper; and I
gain the impression that the pair of us are sitting plunged in a
void of darkness where life does not exist, yet where we are
destined to begin life.

"However, the man was a libertine and a drunkard, and many a
riotous night did he spend with his cronies in the porter's lodge
of the convent. Also, he tried to arouse a similar taste in
myself; and though for a time I resisted the tendency, I at
length, on his taking to beating me, yielded. Only for one man,
however, had I really a liking; and with him it was, and not with
my husband, that I first learnt the meaning of spousehood. . . .
Unfortunately, my lover himself was married; and in time his wife
came to hear of me, and procured my husband's dismissal. The
chief reason was that the lady, a person of great wealth, was
herself handsome, albeit stout, and did not care to see her place
assumed by a nobody. Next, my husband died of drink; and as my
father had long been dead, and I found myself alone, I went to
see and consult my stepmother. All that she said, however, was:
'Why come to me? Go and think things out for yourself.' And I too
then reflected: 'Yes, why should I have gone to her? ' and
repaired to the convent. Yet even there there seemed to be no
place left for me, and eventually old Mother Taisia, who had once
been my governess, said: 'Tatiana, do you return to the world,
for there, and only there, will you have a chance of happiness.
So to the world I returned --and still am roaming it."

"Your quest of happiness is not following an easy road!"

"It is following the road that it best can."

By now the darkness has ceased to keep spread over us, as it
were, the stretched web of a heavy curtain, but has grown thinner
and more transparent with the tension, save that, in places (for
instance, in the window of the hut), it still lies in thick folds
or clots as it peers at us with its sightless eyes.

Over the hummock-like roofs of the huts rise the church's steeple
and the poplar trees; while hither and thither on the wall of the
hut, the cracks and holes in the crumbling plaster have caused the
wall to resemble the map of an unknown country.

Glancing at the woman's dark eyes, I perceive them to be shining
as pensively, innocently as the eyes of a young maiden.

"You are indeed a curious woman!" I remark.

"Perhaps I am," she replies as she moistens her lips with a
slender, almost feline tongue.

"What are you really seeking?"

"I have considered the matter, and know, at last, my mind. It is
this: I hope some day to fall in with a good muzhik with whom to
go in search of land. Probably land of the kind, I mean, is to be
found in the neighbourhood of New Athos, [A monastery in the
Caucasus, built on the reputed site of a cave tenanted by Simeon
the Canaanite] for I have been there already, and know of a
likely spot for the purpose. And there we shall set our place in
order, and lay out a garden and an orchard, and prepare as much
plough land as we may need for our working."

Her words are now firmer, more assured.

"And when we have put everything in order, other folk may join
us; and then, as the oldest settlers in the place, we shall hold
the position of honour. And thus things will continue until a new
village, really a fine settlement, will have become formed--a
settlement of which my husband will be selected the warden until
such time as I shall have made of him a barin [Gentleman or
squire] outright. Also, children may one day play in that
garden, and a summer-house be built there. Ah, how delightful
such a life appears!"

In fact, she has planned out the future so thoroughly that
already she can describe the new establishment in as much detail
as though she has long been a resident in it.

"Yes, I yearn indeed for a nice home!" she continues. "Oh that
such a home could fall to my lot! But the first requisite, of
course, is a muzhik."

Her gentle face and eyes peer into the waning night as though
they aspire to caress everything upon which they may light.

And all the while I am feeling sorry for her--sorry almost to
tears. To conceal the fact I murmur:

"Should I myself suit you?"

She gives a faint laugh.

"No."

"Why not?"

"Because the ideas in your mind are different from mine."

"How do you know what my ideas are?"

She edges away from me a little,then says drily:

"Because I can see them in your eyes. To be plain, I could never
consent."

With a finger tapping upon the mouldy, gnarled old oaken stump on
which we are sitting, she adds:

"The Cossacks, for instance, live comfortably enough; yet I do
not like them."

"What in them is it that displeases you?"

"Somehow they repel me. True, much of everything is theirs; yet
also they have ways which alienate me."

Unable any longer to conceal from her my pity, I say gently:

"Never, I fear, will you discover what you are seeking."

She shakes her head protestingly.

"And never ought a woman to be discouraged," she retorts.
"Woman's proper round is to wish for a child, and to nurse it,
and, when it has been weaned, to get herself ready to have
another one. That is how woman should live.  She should live as
pass spring and summer, autumn and winter."

I find it a pleasure to watch the play of the woman's
intellectual features; and though, also, I long to take her in my
arms, I feel that my better plan will be to seek once more the
quiet, empty steppe, and, bearing in me the recollection of this
woman, to resume my lonely journey towards the region where the
silver wall of the mountains merges with the sky, and the dark
ravines gape at the steppe with their chilly jaws. At the moment,
however, I cannot so do, for the Cossacks have temporarily
deprived me of my passport.

"What are you yourself seeking?" she asks suddenly as again she
edges towards me.

"Simply nothing. My one desire is to observe how folk live."

"And are you travelling alone?"

"I am."

"Even as am I. Oh God, how many lonely people there are in the
world!"

By this time the cattle are awakening from slumber, and, with
their soft lowings, reminding one of a pipe which I used to hear
played by a certain blind old man. Next, four times, with
unsteady touch, the drowsy watchman strikes his gong--twice
softly, once with a vigour that clangs the metal again, and a
fourth time with a mere tap of the iron hammer against the copper
plate.

"What sort of lives do the majority of folk lead?"

"Sorry lives."

"Yes, that is what I too have found."

A pause follows. Then the woman says quietly:

"See, dawn is breaking, yet never this night have my eyes
closed. Often I am like that; often I keep thinking and thinking
until I seem to be the only human being in the world, and the
only human being destined to re-order it."

"Many folk live unworthy lives. They live them amid discord,
abasement, and wrongs innumerable, wrongs born of want and
stupidity."

And as the words leave my lips my mind loses itself in
recollections of all the dark and harrowing and shameful scenes
that I have beheld.

"Listen," I say. "You may approach a man with nothing but good
in your heart, and be prepared to surrender both your freedom and
your strength; yet still he may fail to understand you aright.
And how shall he be blamed for this, seeing that never may he
have been shown what is good?"

She lays a hand upon my shoulder, and looks straight into my eyes
as she parts her comely lips.

"True," she rejoins--"But, dear friend, it is also true that
goodness never bargains."

Together she and I seem to be drifting towards a vista which is
coming to look, as it sloughs the shadow of night, ever clearer
and clearer. It is a vista of white huts, silvery trees, a red
church, and dew-bespangled earth. And as the sun rises he reveals
to us clustered, transparent clouds which, like thousands of
snow-white birds, go gliding over our heads.

"Yes," she whispers again as gently she gives me a nudge. "As one
pursues one's lonely way one thinks and thinks--but of
what? Dear friend, you have said that no one really cares what is
the matter. Ah, HOW true that is! "

Here she springs to her feet, and, pulling me up with her, glues
herself to my breast with a vehemence which causes me momentarily
to push her away. Upon this, bursting into tears, she tends
towards me again, and kisses me with lips so dry as almost to cut
me--she kisses me in a way which penetrates to my very soul.

"You have been oh, so good!" she whispers softly. As she speaks,
the earth seems to be sinking under my feet.

Then she tears herself away, glances around the courtyard, and
darts to a corner where, under a fence, a clump of herbage is
sprouting.

"Go now," she adds in a whisper. "Yes, go."

Then, with a confused smile, as, crouching among the herbage as
though it had been a small cave, she rearranges her hair, she
adds:

"It has befallen so. Ah, me! May God grant unto me His pardon!"

Astonished, feeling that I must be dreaming, I gaze at her with
gratitude, for I sense an extraordinary lightness to be present
in my breast, a radiant void through which joyous, intangible
words and thoughts keep flying as swallows wheel across the
firmament.

"Amid a great sorrow," she adds, "even a small joy becomes a
great felicity."

Yet as I glance at the woman's bosom, whereon moist beads are
standing like dewdrops on the outer earth; as I glance at that
bosom, whereon the sun's rays are finding a roseate reflection,
as though the blood were oozing through the skin, my rapture dies
away, and turns to sorrow, heartache, and tears. For in me there
is a presentiment that before the living juice within that bosom
shall have borne fruit, it will have become dried up.

Presently, in a tone almost of self-excuse, and one wherein the
words sound a little sadly, she continues:

"Times there are when something comes pouring into my soul which
makes my breasts ache with the pain of it. What is there for me
to do at such moments save reveal my thoughts to the moon, or, in
the daytime, to a river? Oh God in Heaven! And afterwards I feel
as ashamed of myself! . . . Do not look at me like that. Why
stare at me with those eyes, eyes so like the eyes of a child?"

"YOUR face, rather, is like a child's," I remark.

"What? Is it so stupid?"

"Something like that."

As she fastens up her bodice she continues:

"Soon the time will be five o'clock, when the bell will ring for
Mass. To Mass I must go today, for I have a prayer to offer to
the Mother of God. . . Shall you be leaving here soon?"

"Yes--as soon, that is to say, as I have received back my
passport."

"And for what destination?"

"For Alatyr. And you?"

She straightens her attire, and rises. As she does so I perceive
that her hips are narrower than her shoulders, and that
throughout she is well-proportioned and symmetrical.

"I? As yet I do not know. True, I had thought of proceeding to
Naltchik, but now, perhaps, I shall not do so, for all my future
is uncertain."

Upon that she extends to me a pair of strong, capable arms, and
proposes with a blush:

"Shall we kiss once more before we part?"

She clasps me with the one arm, and with the other makes the sign
of the cross, adding:

"Good-bye, dear friend, and may Christ requite you for all your
words, for all your sympathy!"

"Then shall we travel together?"

At the words she frees herself, and says firmly, nay, sternly:

"Not so. Never would I consent to such a plan. Of course, had
you been a muzhik--but no. Even then what would have been the use
of it, seeing that life is to be measured, not by a single hour,
but by years?"

And, quietly smiling me a farewell, she moves away towards the
hut, whilst I, remaining seated, lose myself in thoughts of her.
Will she ever overtake her quest in life? Shall I ever behold her
again?

The bell for early Mass begins, though for some time past the
hamlet has been astir, and humming in a sedate and non-festive
fashion.

I enter the hut to fetch my wallet, and find the place empty.
Evidently the whole party has left by the gap in the broken-down
wall.

I repair, next, to the Ataman's office, where I receive back my
passport before setting out to look for my companions in the
square.

In similar fashion to yesterday those "folk from Russia " are
lolling alongside the churchyard wall, and also have seated among
them, leaning his back against a log, the fat-jowled youth from
Penza, with his bruised face looking even larger and uglier than
before, for the reason that his eyes are sunken amid purple
protuberances.

Presently there arrives a newcomer in the shape of an old man
with a grey head adorned with a faded velvet skull-cap, a pointed
beard, a lean, withered frame, prominent cheekbones, a red,
porous-looking, cunningly hooked nose, and the eyes of a thief.

Him a flaxen-haired youth from Orel joins with a similar youth in
accosting.

"Why are YOU tramping?" inquires the former.

"And why are YOU? " the old man retorts in nasal tones as,
looking at no one, he proceeds to mend the handle of a battered
metal teapot with a piece of wire.

"We are travelling in search of work, and therefore living as we
have been commanded to live."

"By WHOM commanded?"

"By God. Have you forgotten?"

Carelessly, but succinctly, the old man retorts:

"Take heed lest upon you, some day, God vomit all the dust and
litter which you are raising by tramping His earth!"

"How?" cries one of the youths, a long-eared stripling.

"Were not Christ and His Apostles also tramps?"

"Yes, CHRIST," is the old man's meaning reply as he raises his
sharp eyes to those of his opponent. "But what are you talking
of, you fools? With whom are you daring to compare yourselves?
Take care lest I report you to the Cossacks!"

I have listened to many such arguments, and always found them
distasteful, even as I have done discussions regarding the soul.
Hence I feel inclined to depart.

At this moment, however, Konev makes his appearance. His mien is
dejected, and his body perspiring, while his eyes keep blinking
rapidly.

"Has any one seen Tanka--that woman from Riazan?" he inquires.
"No? Then the bitch must have bolted during the night. The fact is
that, overnight, someone gave me a drop or two to drink, a mere
dram, but enough to lay me as fast asleep as a bear in winter-
time. And in the meantime, she must have run away with that Penza
fellow."

"No, HE is here," I remark.

"Oh, he is, is he? Well, as what has the company registered
itself? As a set of ikon-painters, I should think!"

Again he begins to look anxiously about him.

"Where can she have got to? " he queries.

"To Mass, maybe."

"0F course! Well, I am greatly smitten with her. Yes, my word I
am!"

Nevertheless, when Mass comes to an end, and, to the sound of a
merry peal of bells, the well-dressed local Cossacks file out of
church, and distribute themselves in gaudy streams about the
hamlet, no Tatiana makes her appearance.

"Then she IS gone," says Konev ruefully. "But I'll find her
yet! I'LL come up with her!"

That this will happen I do not feel confident. Nor do I desire
that it should.

*********************************

Five years later I am pacing the courtyard of the Metechski
Prison in Tiflis, and, as I do so, trying to imagine for what
particular offence I have been incarcerated in that place of
confinement.

Picturesquely grim without, the institution is, inwardly, peopled
with a set of cheerful, but clumsy, humourists. That is to say,
it would seem as though, " by order of the authorities," the
inmates are presenting a stage spectacle in which they are
playing, willingly and zealously, but with a complete lack of
experience, imperfectly comprehended roles as prisoners, warders,
and gendarmes.

For instance, today, when a warder and a gendarme came to my
cell to escort me to exercise, and I said to them, " May I be
excused exercise today? I am not very well, and do not feel like,
etcetera, etcetera," the gendarme, a tall, handsome man with a
red beard, held up to me a warning finger.

"NO ONE," he said, "has given you permission to feel, or not to
feel, like doing things."

To which the warder, a man as dark as a chimney-sweep, with large
blue "whites" to his eyes, added stutteringly:

"To no one here has permission been given to feel, or not to
feel, like doing things. You hear that?"

So to exercise I went.

In this stone-paved yard the air is as hot as in an oven, for
overhead there lours only a small, flat patch of dull, drab-
tinted sky, and on three sides of the yard rise high grey walls,
with, on the fourth, the entrance-gates, topped by a sort of
look-out post.

Over the roof of the building there comes floating the dull roar
of the turbulent river Kura, mingled with shouts from the
hucksters of the Avlabar Bazaar (the town's Asiatic quarter) and
as a cross motif thrown into these sounds, the sighing of the
wind and the cooing of doves. In fact, to be here is like being
in a drum which a myriad drumsticks are beating.

Through the bars of the double line of windows on the second and
the third stories peer the murky faces and towsled heads of some
of the inmates. One of the latter spits his furthest into the
yard--evidently with the intention of hitting myself: but all his
efforts prove vain. Another one shouts with a mordant expletive:

"Hi, you! Why do you keep tramping up and down like an old hen?
Hold up your head!"

Meanwhile the inmates continue to intone in concert a strange
chant which is as tangled as a skein of wool after serving as a
plaything for a kitten's prolonged game of sport. Sadly the chant
meanders, wavers, to a high, wailing note. Then, as it were, it
soars yet higher towards the dull, murky sky, breaks suddenly
into a snarl, and, growling like a wild beast in terror, dies
away to give place to a refrain which coils, trickles forth from
between the bars of the windows until it has permeated the free,
torrid air.

As I listen to that refrain, long familiar to me, it seems to
voice something intelligible, and agitates my soul almost to a
sense of agony. . . .

Presently, while pacing up and down in the shadow of the
building, I happen to glance towards the line of windows. Glued
to the framework of one of the iron window-squares, I can discern
a blue-eyed face. Overgrown with an untidy sable beard it is, as
well as stamped with a look of perpetually grieved surprise.

"That must be Konev," I say to myself aloud.

Konev it is--Konev of the well-remembered eyes. Even at this
moment they are regarding me with puckered attention.

I throw around me a hasty glance. My own warder is dozing on a
shady bench near the entrance. Two more warders are engaged in
throwing dice. A fourth is superintending the pumping of water by
two convicts, and superciliously marking time for their lever
with the formula, "Mashkam, dashkam! Dashkam, mashkam!"

I move towards the wall.

"Is that you, Konev?" is my inquiry.

"It is," he mutters as he thrusts his head a little further
through the grating. "Yes, Konev I am, but who you are I have
not a notion."

"What are you here for?"

"For a matter of base coin, though, to be truthful, I am here
accidentally, without genuine cause."

The warder rouses himself, and, with his keys jingling like a set
of fetters, utters drowsily the command:

"Do not stand still. Also, move further from the wall. To
approach it is forbidden."

"But it is so hot in the middle of the yard, sir!"

"Everywhere it is hot," retorts the man reprovingly, and his
head subsides again. From above comes the whispered query:

"Who ARE you?"

"Well, do you remember Tatiana, the woman from Riazan?"

"DO I remember her?" Konev's voice has in it a touch of subdued
resentment. "DO I remember her? Why, I was tried in court
together with her!"

"Together with HER? Was she too sentenced for the passing of
base coin?"

"Yes. Why should she not have been? She was merely the victim of
an accident, even as I was."

As I resume my walk in the stifling shade I detect that, from the
windows of the basement there is issuing a smell of, in equal
parts, rotten leather, mouldy grain, and dampness. To my mind
there recur Tatiana's words: "Amid a great sorrow even a small
joy becomes a great felicity," and, "I should like to build a
village on some land of my own, and create for myself a new and
better life."

And to my recollection there recur also Tatiana's face and
yearning, hungry breast. As I stand thinking of these things,
there come dropping on to my head from above the low-spoken,
ashen-grey words:

"The chief conspirator in the matter was her lover, the son of a
priest. He it was who engineered the plot. He has been sentenced
to ten years penal servitude."

"And she? "

"Tatiana Vasilievna? To the same, and I also. I leave for Siberia
the day after tomorrow. The trial was held at Kutair. In Russia
I should have got off with a lighter sentence than here, for the
folk in these parts are, one and all, evil, barbaric scoundrels."

"And Tatiana, has she any children?"

"How could she have while living such a rough life as this? Of
course not! Besides, the priest's son is a consumptive."

"Indeed sorry for her am I!"

"So I expect." And in Konev's tone there would seem to be a
touch of meaning. "The woman was a fool--of that there can be no
doubt; but also she was comely, as well as a person out of the
common in her pity for folk."

"Was it then that you found her again?"

"When?"

"On that Feast of the Assumption?"

"Oh no. It was only during the following winter that I came up
with her. At the time she was serving as governess to the
children of an old officer in Batum whose wife had left him."

Something snaps behind me--something sounding like the hammer of a
revolver. However, it is only the warder closing the lid of his
huge watch before restoring the watch to his pocket, giving
himself a stretch, and yawning to the utmost extent of his jaws.

"You see, she had money, and, but for her restlessness, might
have lived a comfortable life enough. As it was, her
restlessness--"

"Time for exercise is up!" shouts the warder.

"Who are you?" adds Konev hastily. "Somehow I seem to remember
your face; but 1 cannot place it."

Yet so stung am I with what I have heard that I move away in
silence: save that just as I reach the top of the steps I turn to
cry:

"Goodbye, mate, and give her my greeting."

"What are you bawling for? " blusters the warder. . . .

The corridor is dim, and filled with an oppressive odour. The
warder swings his keys with a dry, thin clash, and I, to dull the
pain in my heart, strive to imitate him. But the attempt proves
futile; and as the warder opens the door of my cell he says
severely:

"In with you, ten-years man!"

Entering, I move towards the window. Between some grey spikes on
a wall I can just discern the boisterous current of the Kura,
with sakli [warehouses] and houses glued to the opposite bank,
and the figures of some workmen on the roof of a tanning shed.
Below, with his cap pushed to the back of his head,a sentry is pacing
backwards and forwards.

Wearily my mind recalls the many scores of Russian folk whom it
has seen perish to no purpose. And as it does so it feels
crushed, as in a vice, beneath the burden of great and inexorable
sorrow with which all life is dowered.



IN A MOUNTAIN DEFILE

In a mountain defile near a little tributary of the Sunzha, there
was being built a workman's barraque-- a low, long edifice which
reminded one of a large coffin lid.

The building was approaching completion, and, meanwhile, a score
of carpenters were employed in fashioning thin planks into doors
of equal thinness, knocking together benches and tables, and
fitting window-frames into the small window-squares.

Also, to assist these carpenters in the task of protecting the
barraque from tribesmen's nocturnal raids, the shrill-voiced
young student of civil engineering who had been set in charge of
the work had sent to the place, as watchman, an ex-soldier named
Paul Ivanovitch, a man of the Cossack type, and myself.

Yet whereas we were out-at-elbows, the carpenters were sleek,
respectable, monied, well-clad fellows. Also, there was something
dour and irritating about them, since, for one thing, they had
failed to respond to our greeting on our first appearance, and
eyed us with nothing but dislike and suspicion. Hence, hurt by
their chilly attitude, we had withdrawn from their immediate
neighbourhood, constructed a causeway of stepping stones to the
eastern bank of the rivulet, and taken up our abode beneath the
chaotic grey mists which enveloped the mountain side in that
direction.

Also, over the carpenters there was a foreman--a man whose bony
frame, clad in a white shirt and a pair of white trousers, looked
always as though it were ready-attired for death. Moreover, he
wore no cap to conceal the yellow patch of baldness which covered
most of his head, and, in addition, his nose was squat and grey,
his neck and face had over them skin of a porous, pumice-like
consistency, his eyes were green and dim, and upon his features
there was stamped a dead and disagreeable expression. To be
candid, however, behind the dark lips lay a set of fine, close
teeth, while the hairs of the grey beard (a beard trimmed after
the Tartar fashion) were thick and, seemingly, soft.

Never did this man put a hand actually to the work; always he
kept roaming about with the large, rigid-looking fingers of his
hands tucked into his belt, and his fixed and expressionless eyes
scanning the barraque, the men, and the work as his lips vented
some such lines as:

Oh God our Father, bound hast Thou
A crown of thorns upon my brow!
Listen to my humble prayer!
Lighten the burden which I bear!

"What on earth can be in the man's mind?" once remarked the ex-
soldier, with a frowning glance at the singer.

As for our duties, my mates and I had nothing to do, and soon
began to find the time tedious. For his part, the man with the
Cossack physiognomy scaled the mountain side; whence he could be
heard whistling and snapping twigs with his heavy feet, while the
ex-soldier selected a space between two rocks for a shelter of
ace-rose boughs, and, stretching himself on his stomach, fell to
smoking strong mountain tobacco in his large meerschaum pipe as
dimly, dreamily he contemplated the play of the mountain torrent.
Lastly, I myself selected a seat on a rock which overhung the
brook, dipped my feet in the coolness of the water, and proceeded
to mend my shirt.

At intervals, the defile would convey to our ears a dull echo of
sounds so wholly at variance with the locality as muffled hammer-
blows, a screeching of saws, a rasping of planes, and a confused
murmur of human voices.

Also, a moist breeze blew constantly from the dark-blue depths of
the defile, and caused the stiff, upright larches on the knoll
behind the barraque to rustle their boughs, and distilled from
the rank soil the voluptuous scents of ace-rose and pitch-pine,
and evoked in the trees' quiet gloom a soft, crooning, somnolent
lullaby.

About a sazhen [Fathom] below the level of the barraque there
coursed noisily over its bed of stones a rivulet white with foam.
Yet though of other sounds in the vicinity there were but few,
the general effect was to suggest that everything in the
neighbourhood was speaking or singing a tale of such sort as to
shame the human species into silence.

On our own side of the valley the ground lay bathed in sunshine--
lay scorched to the point of seeming to have spread over it a
tissue-cloth. Old gold in colour, while from every side arose the
sweet perfume of dried grasses, and in dark clefts there could be
seen sprouting the long, straight spears and fiery, reddish,
cone-shaped blossoms of that bold, hardy plant which is known to
us as saxifrage--the plant of which the contemplation makes one
long to burst into music, and fills one's whole body with
sensuous languor.

Laced with palpitating, snow-white foam, the beautiful rivulet
pursued its sportive way over tessellated stones which flashed
through the eddies of the glassy, sunlit, amber-coloured water
with the silken sheen of a patchwork carpet or costly shawl of
Cashmir.

Through the mouth of the defile one could reach the valley of the
Sunzha, whence, since men were ther, building a railway to
Petrovsk on the Caspian Sea, there kept issuing and breaking
against the crags a dull rumble of explosions, of iron rasped
against stone, of whistles of works locomotives, and of animated
human voices.

From the barraque the distance to the point where the defile
debouched upon the valley was about a hundred paces, and as one
issued thence one could see, away to the left, the level steppes
of the Cis-Caucasus, with a boundary wall of blue hills, topped
by the silver-hewn saddle of Mount Elburz behind it. True, for
the most part the steppes had a dry, yellow, sandy look, with
merely here and there dark patches of gardens or black poplar
clumps which rendered the golden glare more glaring still; yet
also there could be discerned on the expanse farm buildings
shaped like lumps of sugar or butter, with, in their vicinity,
toylike human beings and diminutive cattle -- the whole shimmering
and melting in a mirage born of the heat. And at the mere sight
of those steppes, with their embroidery of silk under the blue of
the zenith, one's muscles tightened, and one felt inspired with a
longing to spring to one's feet, close one's eyes, and walk for
ever with the soft, mournful song of the waste crooning in one's
ears.

To the right also of the defile lay the winding valley of the
Sunzha, with more hills; and above those hills hung the blue sky,
and in their flanks were clefts which, full of grey mist, kept
emitting a ceaseless din of labour, a sound of dull explosions, as
a great puissant force attained release.

Yet almost at the same moment would that hurly-burly so merge
with the echo of our defile, so become buried in the defile's
verdure and rock crevices, that once more the place would seem to
be singing only its own gentle, gracious song.

And, should one turn to glance up the defile, it could be seen to
grow narrower and narrower as it ascended towards the mists, and
the latter to grow thicker and thicker until the whole defile was
swathed in a dark blue pall. Higher yet there could be discerned
the brilliant gleam of blue sky. Higher yet one could distinguish
the ice-capped peak of Kara Dagh, floating and dissolving amid
the ( from here) invisible sunlight. Highest of all again brooded
the serene, steadfast peace of heaven.

Also, everything was bathed in a strange tint of bluish grey: to
which circumstance must have been due the fact that always one's
soul felt filled with restlessness, one's heart stirred to
disquietude, and fired as with intoxication, charged with
incomprehensible thoughts, and conscious as of a summons to set
forth for some unknown destination.

******************************

The foreman of the carpenters shaded his eyes to gaze in our
direction; and as he did so, he drawled and rasped out in tedious
fashion:

"Some shall to the left be sent,
And in the pit of Hell lie pent.
While others, holding palm in hand,
Shall on God's right take up their stand."

"DID you hear that?" the ex-soldier growled through clenched
teeth. "'Palm in hand' indeed! Why, the fellow must be a
Mennonite or a Molokan, though the two, really, are one, and
absolutely indistinguishable, as well as equally foolish. Yes,
'palm in hand' indeed!"

Similarly could I understand the ex-soldier's indignation, for,
like him, I felt that such dreary, monotonous singing was
altogether out of place in a spot where everything could troll a
song so delightful as to lead one to wish to hear nothing more,
to hear only the whispering of the forest and the babbling of the
stream. And especially out of place did the terms "palm" and
"Mennonite" appear.

Yet I had no great love for the ex-soldier. Somehow he jarred
upon me. Middle-aged, squat, square, and bleached with the sun,
he had faded eyes, flattened-out features, and an expression of
restless moroseness. Never could I make out what he really
wanted, what he was really seeking. For instance, once, after
reviewing the Caucasus from Khassav-Urt to Novorossisk, and from
Batum to Derbent, and, during the review, crossing the mountain
range by three different routes at least, he remarked with a
disparaging smile:

"I suppose the Lord God made the country."

"You do not like it, then? How should I? Good for nothing is
what I call it."

Then, with a further glance at me, and a twist of his sinewy
neck, he added:

"However, not bad altogether are its forests."

A native of Kaluga, he had served in Tashkend, and, in fighting
with the Chechintzes of that region,had been wounded in the head
with a stone. Yet as he told me the story of this incident, he
smiled shamefacedly, and, throughout, kept his glassy eyes fixed
upon the ground.

"Though I am ashamed to confess it," he said, "once a woman
chipped a piece out of me. You see, the women of that region are
shrieking devils--there is no other word for it; and when we
captured a village called Akhal-Tiapa a number of them had to be
cut up, so that they lay about in heaps, and their blood made
walking slippery. Just as our company of the reserve entered the
street, something caught me on the head. Afterwards, I learnt that
a woman on a roof had thrown a stone, and, like the rest, had had
to be put out of the way."

Here, knitting his brows, the ex-soldier went on in more serious
vein:

"Yet all that folk used to say about those women, about their
having beards to shave, turned out to be so much gossip, as I
ascertained for myself. I did so by lifting the woman's skirt on
the point of my bayonet, when I perceived that, though she was
lean, and smelt like a goat, she was quite as regular as, as--"

"Things must have been indeed terrible on that expedition!" I
interposed.

"I do not know for certain, since, though men who took an actual
part in the expedition's engagements have said that they were so
(the Chechintze is a vicious brute, and never gives in), I myself
know but little of the affair, since I spent my whole time in the
reserve, and never once did my company advance to the assault.
No, it merely lay about on the sand, and fired at long range. In
fact, nothing but sand was to be seen thereabouts; nor did we
ever succeed in finding out what the fighting was for. True, if a
piece of country be good, it is in our interest to take it; but
in the present case the country was poor and bare, with never a
river in sight, and a climate so hot that all one thought of was
one's mortal need of a drink. In fact, some of our fellows died
of thirst outright. Moreover, in those parts there grows a sort
of millet called dzhugar -- millet which not only has a horrible
taste, but proves absolutely delusive, since the more one eats of
it, the less one feels filled."

As the ex-soldier told me the tale colourlessly and reluctantly,
with frequent pauses between the sentences (as though either he
found it difficult to recall the experience or he were thinking
of something else), he never once looked me straight in the face,
but kept his eyes shamefacedly fixed upon the ground.

Unwieldily and unhealthily stout, he always conveyed to me the
impression of being charged with a vague discontent, a sort of
captious inertia.

"Absolutely unfit for settlement is this country " he continued as
he glanced around him. "It is fit only to do nothing in. For
that matter, one doesn't WANT to do anything in it, save to live
with one's eyes bulging like a drunkard's-- for the climate is too
hot, and the place smells like a chemist's shop or a hospital."

Nevertheless, for the past eight years had he been roaming this
"too hot" country, as though fascinated!

"Why not return to Riazan?" I suggested.

"Nothing would there be there for me to do," he replied through
his teeth, and with an odd division of his words.

My first encounter with him had been at the railway station at
Armavir, where, purple in the face with excitement, he had been
stamping like a horse, and, with distended eyes, hissing, or,
rather, snarling, at a couple of Greeks:

"I'll tear the flesh from your bones!"

Meanwhile the two lean, withered, ragged, identically similar
denizens of Hellas had been baring their sharp white teeth at
intervals, and saying apologetically:

"What has angered you, sir?"

Finally, regardless of the Greeks' words, the ex-soldier had beat
his breast like a drum, and shouted in accents of increased
venom:

"Now, where are you living? In Russia, do you say? Then who is
supporting you there? Aha-a-a! Russia, it is said, is a good
foster-mother. I expect you say the same."

And, lastly, he had approached a fat, grey-headed, bemedalled
gendarme, and complained to him:

"Everyone curses us born Russians, yet everyone comes to live
with us--Greeks, Germans, Songs, and the lot. And while they get
their livelihood here, and cat and drink their fill, they
continue to curse us. A scandal, is it not?"

*************************


The third member of our party was a man of about thirty who wore
a Cossack cap over his left ear, and had a Cossack forelock,
rounded features, a large nose, a dark moustache, and a retrousse
lip. When the volatile young engineering student first brought
him to us and said, "Here is another man for you," the newcomer
glanced at me through the lashes of his elusive eyes--then plunged
his hands into the pockets of his Turkish overalls. Just as we
were departing, however, he withdrew one hand from the left
trouser pocket, passed it slowly over the dark bristles of his
unshaven chin, and asked in musical tones:

"Do you come from Russia?"

"Whence else, I should like to know?" snapped the ex-soldier
gruffly.

Upon this the newcomer twisted his right-hand moustache then
replaced his hand in his pocket. Broad-shouldered, sturdy, and
well-built throughout, he walked with the stride of a man who is
accustomed to cover long distances. Yet with him he had brought
neither wallet nor gripsack, and somehow his supercilious,
retrousse upper lip and thickly fringed eyes irritated me, and
inclined me to be suspicious of, and even actively to dislike,
the man.

Suddenly, while we were proceeding along the causeway by the side
of the rivulet, he turned to us, and said, as he nodded towards
the sportively coursing water:

"Look at the matchmaker!"

The ex-soldier hoisted his bleached eyebrows, and gazed around
him for a moment in bewilderment. Then he whispered:

"The fool!"

But, for my own part, I considered that what the man had said was
apposite; that the rugged, boisterous little river did indeed
resemble some fussy, light-hearted old lady who loved to arrange
affaires du coeur both for her own private amusement and for the
purpose of enabling other folk to realise the joys of affection
amid which she was living, and of which she would never grow
weary, and to which she desired to introduce the rest of the
world as speedily as possible.

Similarly, when we arrived at the barraque this man with the
Cossack face glanced at the rivulet, and then at the mountains
and the sky, and, finally, appraised the scene in one pregnant,
comprehensive exclamation of " Slavno! " [How splendid!]

The ex-soldier, who was engaged in ridding himself of his
knapsack, straightened himself, and asked with his arms set
akimbo:

"WHAT is it that is so splendid?"

For a moment or two the newcomer merely eyed the squat figure of
his questioner--a figure upon which hung drab shreds as lichen
hangs upon a stone. Then he said with a smile:

"Cannot you see for yourself? Take that mountain there, and that
cleft in the mountain-- are they not good to look at?"

And as he moved away, the ex-soldier gaped after him with a
repeated whisper of:

"The fool!"

To which presently he added in a louder, as well as a mysterious,
tone:

"I have heard that occasionally they send fever patients hither
for their health."

The same evening saw two sturdy women arrive with supper for the
carpenters; whereupon the clatter of labour ceased, and therefore
the rustling of the forest and the murmuring of the rivulet
became the more distinct.

Next, deliberately, and with many coughs, the ex-soldier set to
work to collect some twigs and chips for the purpose of lighting
a fire. After which, having arranged a kettle over the flames, he
said to me suggestively:

"You too should collect some firewood, for in these parts the
nights are dark and chilly."

I set forth in search of chips among the stones which lay around
the barraque, and, in so doing, stumbled across the newcomer, who
was lying with his body resting on an elbow, and his head on his
hand, as he conned a manuscript spread out before him. As he
raised his eyes to gaze vaguely, inquiringly into my face, I saw
that one of his eyes was larger than the other.

Evidently he divined that he interested me, for he smiled. Yet so
taken aback by this was I, that I passed on my way without
speaking.

Meanwhile the carpenters, disposed in two circles around the
barraque (a circle to each woman), partook of a silent supper.

Deeper and deeper grew the shadow of night over the defile.
Warmer and warmer, denser and denser, grew the air, until the
twilight caused the slopes of the mountains to soften in outline,
and the rocks to seem to swell and merge with the bluish-
blackness which overhung the bed of the defile, and the
superimposed heights to form a single apparent whole, and the
scene in general to resolve itself into, become united into, one
compact bulk.

Quietly then did tints hitherto red extinguish their tremulous
glow--softly there flared up, dusted purple in the sunset's sheen,
the peak of Kara Dagh. Vice versa, the foam of the rivulet now
blushed to red, and, seemingly, assuaged its vehemence--flowed
with a deeper, a more pensive, note; while similarly the forest
hushed its voice, and appeared to stoop towards the water while
emitting ever more powerful, intoxicating odours to mingle with
the resinous, cloyingly sweet perfume of our wood fire.

The ex-soldier squatted down before the little blaze, and
rearranged some fuel under the kettle.

"Where is the other man?" said he. "Go and fetch him."

I departed for the purpose, and, on my way, heard one of the
carpenters in the neighbourhood of the barraque say in a thick,
unctuous, sing-song voice.

"A great work is it indeed!"

Whereafter I heard the two women fall to drawling in low, hungry
accents:

"With the flesh I'll conquer pain;
The spirit shall my lust restrain;
All-supreme the soul shall reign;
And carnal vices lure in vain."

True, the women pronounced their words distinctly enough; yet
always they prolonged the final "u" sound of the stanza's first
and third lines until, as the melody floated away into the
darkness, and, as it were, sank to earth, it came to resemble the
long-drawn howl of a wolf.

In answer to my invitation to come to supper, the newcomer sprang
to his feet, folded up his manuscript, stuffed it into one of the
pockets of his ragged coat, and said with a smile:

"I had just been going to resort to the carpenters, for they
would have given us some bread, I suppose? Long is it since I
tasted anything."

The same words he repeated on our approaching the ex-soldier;
much as though he took a pleasure in their phraseology.

"You suppose that they would have given us bread?" echoed the ex-
soldier as he unfastened his wallet. "Not they! No love is lost
between them and ourselves."

"Whom do you mean by 'ourselves'?"

"Us here--you and myself--all Russian folk who may happen to be in
these parts. From the way in which those fellows keep singing
about palms, I should judge them to be sectarians of the sort
called Mennonites."

"Or Molokans, rather?" the other man suggested as he seated
himself in front of the fire.

"Yes, or Molokans. Molokans or Mennonites-- they're all one. It is
a German faith and though such fellows love a Teuton, they do not
exactly welcome US."

Upon this the man with the Cossack forelock took a slice of bread
which the ex-soldier cut from a loaf, with an onion and a pinch
of salt. Then, as he regarded us with a pair of good-humoured
eyes, he said, balancing his food on the palms of his hands:

"There is a spot on the Sunzha, near here, where those fellows
have a colony of their own. Yes, I myself have visited it. True,
those fellows are hard enough, but at the same time to speak
plainly, NO ONE in these parts has any regard for us since only
too many of the sort of Russian folk who come here in search of
work are not overly-desirable."

"Where do you yourself come from?" The ex-soldier's tone was
severe.

"From Kursk, we might say."

"From Russia, then?"

"Yes, I suppose so. But I have no great opinion even of myself."

The ex-soldier glanced distrustfully at the newcomer. Then he
remarked:

"What you say is cant, sheer Jesuitism. It is fellows like
THOSE, rather, that ought to have a poor opinion of themselves."

To this the other made no reply--merely he put a piece of bread
into his mouth. For a moment or two the ex-soldier eyed him
frowningly. Then he continued:

"You seem to me to be a native of the Don country? "

"Yes, I have lived on the Don as well."

"And also served in the army?"

"No. I was an only son."

"Of a miestchanin? " [A member of the small commercial class.]

"No, of a merchant."

"And your name--?"

"Is Vasili."

The last reply came only after a pause, and reluctantly;
wherefore, perceiving that the Kurskan had no particular desire
to discuss his own affairs, the ex-soldier said no more on the
subject, but lifted the kettle from the fire.

The Molokans also had kindled a blaze behind the corner of the
barraque, and now its glow was licking the yellow boards of the
structure until they seemed almost to be liquescent, to be about
to dissolve and flow over the ground in a golden stream.

Presently, as their fervour increased, the carpenters, invisible
amid the obscurity, fell to singing hymns--the basses intoning
monotonously, " Sing, thou Holy Angel! " and voices of higher
pitch responding, coldly and formally.

"Sing ye!
Sing glory unto Christ, thou Angel of Holiness!
Sing ye!
Our singing will we add unto Thine,
Thou Angel of Holiness!"

And though the chorus failed altogether to dull the splashing of
the rivulet and the babbling of the by-cut over a bed of stones,
it seemed out of place in this particular spot;it aroused
resentment against men who could not think of a lay more atune
with the particular living, breathing objects around us.

Gradually darkness enveloped the defile until only over the mouth
of the pass, over the spot where, gleaming a brilliant blue, the
rivulet escaped into a cleft that was overhung with a mist of a
deeper shade, was there not yet suspended the curtain of the
Southern night.

Presently, the gloom caused one of the rocks in our vicinity to
assume the guise of a monk who, kneeling in prayer, had his head
adorned with a pointed skull-cap, and his face buried in his
hands. Similarly, the stems of the trees stirred in the firelight
until they developed the semblance of a file of friars entering,
for early Mass, the porch of their chapel-of-ease.

To my mind there then recurred a certain occasion when, on just
such a dark and sultry night as this, I had been seated tale-
telling under the boundary-wall of a row of monastic cells in the
Don country. Suddenly I had heard a window above my head open,
and someone exclaim in a kindly, youthful voice:

"The Mother of God be blessed for all this goodly world of ours!"

And though the window had closed again before I had had time to
discern the speaker, I had known that there was resident in the
monastery a friar who had large eyes, and a limp, and just such a
face as had Vasili here; wherefore, in all probability it had been
he who had breathed the benediction upon mankind
at large, for the reason that moments there are when all humanity
seems to be one's own body, and in oneself there seems to beat
the heart of all humanity. . . .

Vasili consumed his food deliberately as, breaking off morsels
from his slice, and neatly parting his moustache, he placed the
morsels in his mouth with a curious stirring of two globules
which underlay the skin near the ears.

The ex-soldier, however, merely nibbled at his food--he ate but
little, and that lazily. Then he extracted a pipe from his breast
pocket, filled it with tobacco, lit it with a faggot taken from
the fire, and said as he set himself to listen to the singing of
the Molokans:

"They are filled full, and have started bleating. Always folk
like them seek to be on the right side of the Almighty."

"Does that hurt you in any way?" Vasili asked with a smile.

"No, but I do not respect them--they are less saints than
humbugs, than prevaricators whose first word is God, and second
word rouble."

"How do you know that?" cried Vasili amusedly. "And even if
their first word IS God, and their second word rouble, we had
best not be too hard upon them, since if they chose to be hard
upon US, where should WE be? Yes, we have only to open our mouths
to speak a word or two for ourselves, and we should find every
fist at our teeth."

" Quite so," the ex-soldier agreed as, taking up a square of
scantling, he examined it attentively.

"Whom DO you respect?" Vasili continued after a pause.

"I respect," the ex-soldier said with some emphasis, "only the
Russian people, the true Russian people, the folk who labour on
land whereon labour is hard. Yet who are the folk whom you find
HERE? In this part of the world the business of living is an easy
one. Much of every sort of natural produce is to be had, and the
soil is generous and light--you need but to scratch it for it to
bear, and for yourself to reap. Yes, it is indulgent to a fault.
Rather, it is like a maiden. Do but touch her, and a child will
arrive."

"Agreed," was Vasili's remark as he drank tea from a tin mug.
"Yet to this very part of the world is it that I should like to
transport every soul in Russia."

"And why?"

"Because here they could earn a living."

"Then is not that possible in Russia? "

"Well, why are you yourself here?"

"Because I am a man lacking ties."

"And why are you lacking ties?"

"Because it has been so ordered--it is, so to speak, my lot."

"Then had you not better consider WHY it is your lot?"

The ex-soldier took his pipe from his mouth, let fall the hand
which held it, and smoothed his plain features in silent
amazement. Then he exclaimed in uncouth, querulous tones:

"Had I not better consider WHY it is my lot, and so forth? Why,
damn it, the causes are many. For one thing, if one has
neighbours who neither live nor see things as oneself does, but
are uncongenial, what does one do? One just leaves them, and
clears out--more especially if one be neither a priest nor a
magistrate. Yet YOU say that I had better consider why this is my
lot. Do you think that YOU are the only man able to consider
things, possessed of a brain? "

And in an access of fury the speaker replaced his pipe, and sat
frowning in silence. Vasili eyed his interlocutor's features as
the firelight played red upon them, and, finally, said in an
undertone:

"Yes, it is always so. We fail to get on with our neighbours,
yet lack a charter of our own, so, having no roots to hold us,
just fall to wandering, troubling other folk, and earning
dislike!"

"The dislike of whom?" gruffly queried the ex-soldier.

"The dislike of everyone, as you yourself have said!"

In answer the ex-soldier merely emitted a cloud of smoke which
completely concealed his form. Yet Vasili's voice had in it an
agreeable note, and was flexible and ingratiating, while
enunciating its words roundly and distinctly.

A mountain owl, one of those splendid brown creatures which have
the crafty physiognomy of a cat, and the sharp grey ears of a
mouse, made the forest echo with its obtrusive cry. A bird of
this species I once encountered among the defile's crags, and as
the creature sailed over my head it startled me with the glassy
eyes which, as round as buttons, seemed to be lit from within
with menacing fire. Indeed, for a moment or two I stood half-
stupefied with terror, for I could not conceive what the creature
was.

"Whence did you get that splendid pipe?" next asked Vasili as
he rolled himself a cigarette. "Surely it is a pipe of old
German make?"

"You need not fear that I stole it," the ex-soldier responded as
he removed it from his lips and regarded it proudly. "It was
given me by a woman."

To which, with a whimsical wink, he added a sigh.

"Tell me how it happened," said Vasili softly. Then he flung up
his arms, and stretched himself with a despondent cry of:

"Ah, these nights here! Never again may God send me such bad
ones! Try to sleep as one may, one never succeeds. Far easier,
indeed, is it to sleep during the daytime, provided that one can
find a shady spot. During such nights I go almost mad with
thinking, and my heart swells and murmurs."

The ex-soldier, who had listened with mouth agape and eyebrows
raised even higher than usual, responded to this:

"It is the same with me. If one could only--What did you say?"

This last was addressed to myself, who had been about to remark,
"The same with me also," but on seeing the pair exchanging a
strange glance (as though involuntarily they had surprised one
another), had left the words unspoken. My companions then set
themselves to a mutually eager questioning with respect to their
respective identities, past experiences, places of origin, and
destinations, even as though they had been two kinsmen who,
meeting unexpectedly, had discovered for the first time their
bond of relationship.

Meanwhile the black, fringed boughs of the pine trees hung
stretched over the flames of the Molokans' fire as though they
would catch some of the fire's glow and warmth, or seize it
altogether, and put it out. And when, at times, their red tongues
projected beyond the corner of the barraque, they made the
building look as though it had caught alight, and extended their
glow even to the rivulet. Constantly the night was growing denser
and more stifling; constantly it seemed to embrace the body more
and more caressingly, until one bathed in it as in an ocean.
Also, much as a wave removes dirt from the skin, so the softly
vocal darkness seemed to refresh and cleanse the soul. For it is
on such nights as that that the soul dons its finest raiment, and
trembles like a bride at the expectation of something glorious.

"You say that she had a squint?" presently I heard Vasili
continue in an undertone, and the ex-soldier slowly reply:

"Yes, she had one from childhood upwards--she had one from the
day when a fall from a cart caused her to injure her eyes. Yet,
if she had not always gone about with one of her eyes shaded, you
would never have guessed the fact. Also, she was so neat and
practical! And her kindness--well, it was kindness as
inexhaustible as the water of that rivulet there; it was kindness
of the sort that wished well to all the world, and to all
animals, and to every beggar, and even to myself!  So at last
there gripped my heart the thought, 'Why should I not try a
soldier's luck? She is the master's favourite--true; yet none the
less the attempt shall be made by me.' However, this way or that,
always the reply was 'No'; always she put out at me an elbow, and
cut me short."

Vasili, lying prone upon his back, twitched his moustache, and
chewed a stalk of grass. His eyes were fully open, and for the
second time I perceived that one of them was larger than the
other. The ex-soldier, seated near Vasili's shoulder, stirred the
fire with a bit of charred stick, and sent sparks of gold flying
to join the midges which were gliding to and fro over the blaze.
Ever and anon night-moths subsided into the flames with a plop,
crackled, and became changed into lumps of black. For my own
part, I constructed a couch on a pile of pine boughs, and there
lay down. And as I listened to the ex-soldier's familiar story, I
recalled persons whom I had on one and another occasion
remembered, and speeches which on one and another occasion had
made an impression upon me.

"But at last," the ex-soldier continued, "I took heart of
grace, and caught her in a barn. Pressing her into a corner, I
said: 'Now let it be yes or no. Of, course it shall be as you
wish, but remember that I am a soldier with a small stock of
patience.' Upon that she began to struggle and exclaim: 'What do
you want? What do you want?' until, bursting into tears like a
girl, she said through her sobs: 'Do not touch me. I am not the
sort of woman for you. Besides, I love another--not our master,
but another, a workman, a former lodger of ours. Before he
departed he said to me: "Wait for me until I have found you a
nice home, and returned to fetch you"; and though it is
seventeen years since I heard speech or whisper of him, and maybe
he has since forgotten me, or fallen in love with someone else,
or come to grief, or been murdered, you, who are a map, will
understand that I must bide a little while longer.' True, this
offended me (for in what respect was I any worse than the other
man?); yet also I felt sorry for her, and grieved that I should
have wronged her by thinking her frivolous, when all the time
there had been THIS at her heart. I drew back, therefore--I could
not lay a finger upon her, though she was in my power. And at
last I said: 'Good-bye! I am going away.' 'Go,' she replied.
'Yes, go for the love of Christ!' . . . Wherefore, on the
following evening I settled accounts with our master, and at dawn
of a Sunday morning packed my wallet, took with me this pipe, and
departed. 'Yes, take the pipe, Paul Ivanovitch,' she said before
my departure. 'Perhaps it will serve to keep you in remembrance
of me--you whom henceforth I shall regard as a brother, and whom I
thank.' . . . As I walked away I was very nigh to tears, so keen
was the pain in my heart. Aye, keen it was indeed! "

"You did right," Vasili remarked softly after a pause.

"Things must always so befall. Always must it be a case either
of 'Yes?' 'Yes,' and of folk coming together, or of 'No' 'No,'
and of folk parting. And invariably the one person in the case
grieves the other. Why should that be?"

Emitting a cloud of grey smoke, the ex-soldier replied
thoughtfully:

"Yes, I know I did right; but that right was done only at a
great cost."

"And always that too is the case," Vasili agreed. Then he added:

"Generally such fortune falls to the lot of people who have
tender consciences. He who values himself also values his
fellows; but, unfortunately a man all too seldom values even
himself."

"To whom are you referring? To you and myself?"

"To our Russian folk in general."

"Then you cannot have very much respect for Russia." The ex-
soldier's tone had taken on a curious note. He seemed to be
feeling both astonished at and grieved for his companion.

The other, however, did not reply; and after a few moments the
ex-soldier softly concluded:

"So now you have heard my story."

By this time the carpenters had ceased singing around the
barraque, and let their fire die down until quivering on the wall
of the edifice there was only a fiery-red patch, a patch barely
sufficient to render visible the shadows of the rocks; while
beside the fire there was seated only a tall figure with a black
beard which had, grasped in its hands, a heavy cudgel, and, lying
near its right foot, an axe. The figure was that of a watchman
set by the carpenters to keep an eye upon ourselves, the
appointed watchmen; though the fact in no way offended us.

Over the defile, in a ragged strip of sky, there were gleaming
stars, while the rivulet was bubbling and purling, and from the
obscurity of the forest there kept coming to our ears, now the
cautious, rustling tread of some night animal, and now the
mournful cry of an owl, until all nature seemed to be instinct
with a secret vitality the sweet breath of which kept moving the
heart to hunger insatiably for the beautiful.

Also, as I lay listening to the voice of the ex-soldier, a voice
reminiscent of a distant tambourine, and to Vasili's pensive
questions, I conceived a liking for the men, and began to detect
that in their relations there was dawning something good and
human. At the same time, the effect of some of Vasili's dicta on
Russia was to arouse in me mingled feelings which impelled me at
once to argue with him and to induce him to speak at greater
length, with more clarity, on the subject of our mutual
fatherland. Hence always I have loved that night for the visions
which it brought to me--visions which still come back to me like a
dear, familiar tale.

I thought of a student of Kazan whom I had known in the days of
the past, of a young fellow from Viatka who, pale-browed, and
sententious of diction, might almost have been brother to the ex-
soldier himself. And once again I heard him declare that "before
all things must I learn whether or not there exists a God; pre-
eminently must I make a beginning there."

And I thought, too, of a certain accoucheuse named Velikova who
had been a comely, but reputedly gay, woman. And I remembered a
certain occasion when, on a hill overlooking the river Kazan and
the Arski Plain, she had stood contemplating the marshes below,
and the far blue line of the Volga; until suddenly turning pale,
she had, with tears of joy sparkling in her fine eyes, cried
under her breath, but sufficiently loudly for all present to hear
her:

"Ah, friends, how gracious and how fair is this land of ours!
Come, let us salute that land for having deemed us worthy of
residence therein!"

Whereupon all present, including a deacon-student from the
Ecclesiastical School, a Morduine from the Foreign College, a
student of veterinary science, and two of our tutors, had done
obeisance. At the same time I recalled the fact that subsequently
one of the party had gone mad, and committed suicide.

Again, I recalled how once, on the Piani Bor [Liquor Wharf] by
the river Kama, a tall, sandy young fellow with intelligent eyes
and the face of a ne'er-do-well had caught my attention. The day
had been a hot, languorous Sunday on which all things had seemed
to be exhibiting their better side, and telling the sun that it
was not in vain that he was pouring out his brilliant potency,
and diffusing his living gold; while the man of whom I speak had,
dressed in a new suit of blue serge, a new cap cocked awry, and a
pair of brilliantly polished boots, been standing at the edge of
the wharf, and gazing at the brown waters of the Kama, the
emerald expanse beyond them and the silver-scaled pools left
behind by the tide. Until, as the sun had begun to sink towards
the marshes on the other side of the river, and to become
dissolved into streaks, the man had smiled with increasing
rapture, and his face had glowed with creasing eagerness and
delight; until finally he had snatched the cap from his head,
flung it, with a powerful throw far out into the russet waters,
and shouted: "Kama, O my mother, I love you, and never will
desert you!"

And the last, and also the best, recollection of things seen
before the night of which I speak was the recollection of an
occasion when, one late autumn, I had been crossing the Caspian
Sea on an old two-masted schooner laden with dried apricots,
plums, and peaches. Sailing on her also she had had some hundred
fishermen from the Bozhi Factory, men who, originally forest
peasants of the Upper Volga, had been well-built, bearded,
healthy, goodhumoured, animal-spirited young fellows, youngsters
tanned with the wind, and salted with the sea water; youngsters
who, after working hard at their trade, had been rejoicing at the
prospect of returning home. And careering about the deck like
youthful bears as ever and anon lofty, sharp-pointed waves had
seized and tossed aloft the schooner, and the yards had cracked,
and the taut-run rigging had whistled, and the sails had bellied
into globes, and the howling wind had shaved off the white crests
of billows, and partially submerged the vessel in clouds of foam.

And seated on the deck with his broad back resting against the
mainmast there had been one young giant in particular. Clad in a
white linen shirt and a pair of blue serge trousers, and innocent
alike of beard and moustache, this young fellow had had full, red
lips, blue, boyish, and exceedingly translucent eyes, and a face
intoxicated in excelsis with the happiness of youth; while
leaning across his knees as they had rested sprawling over the
deck there had been a young female trimmer of fish, a wench as
massive and tall as the young man himself, and a wench whose face
had become tanned to roughness with the sun and wind, eyebrows
dark, full, and as large as the wings of a swallow, breasts as
firm as stone, and teats around which, as they projected from the
folds of a red bodice, there had lain a pattern of blue veins.

The broad, iron-black palm of the young fellow's long, knotted
hand had been resting on the woman's left breast, with the arm
bare to the elbow; while in his right hand, as he had sat gazing
pensively at the woman's robust figure, there had been grasped a
tin mug from which some of the red liquor had scattered stains
over the front of his linen shirt.

Meanwhile, around the pair there had been hovering some of the
youngster's comrades, who, with coats buttoned to the throat, and
caps gripped to prevent their being blown away by the wind, had
employed themselves with scanning the woman's figure with envious
eyes, and viewing her from either side. Nay, the shaggy green
waves themselves had been stealing occasional glimpses at the
picture as clouds had swirled across the sky, gulls had uttered
their insatiable scream, and the sun, dancing on the foam-flecked
waters, had vested the billows, now in tints of blue, now in
natural tints as of flaming jewels.

In short, all the passengers on the schooner had been shouting
and laughing and singing, while the great bearded peasants had
also been paying assiduous court to a large leathern bottle which
had lain ensconced on a heap of peach-sacks, with the result that
the scene had come to have about it something of the antique,
legendary air of the return of Stepan Razin from his Persian
campaign.

At length the buffeting of the wind had caused an old man with a
crooked nose set on a hairy, faun-like face to stumble over one
of the woman's feet; whereupon he had halted, thrown up his head
with nonsenile vigour, and exclaimed:

"May the devil fly away with you, you shameless hussy! Why lie
sprawling about the deck like this? See, too, how exposed you
are!"

The woman had not stirred at the words--she had not even opened an
eye; only over her lips there had passed a faint tremor. Whereas
the young fellow had straightened himself, deposited his tin mug
upon the deck, and cried loudly as he laid his disengaged hand
upon the woman's breast.

"Ah, you envy me, do you, Yakim Petrov? Never mind, though you
have done no great harm. But run no risks; do not look for
needless trouble, for your day for sucking sugarplums is past."

Whereafter, raising both his hands, the young fellow had softly
let them sink again upon the woman's bosom as he added
triumphantly:

"These breasts could feed all Russia! "

Then, and only then, had the woman smiled a long, slow smile. And
as she had done so everything in the vicinity had seemed to smile
in unison, and to rise and fall in harmony with her bosom--yes,
the whole vessel, and the vessel's freight. And at the moment
when a particularly large wave had struck the bulwarks, and
besprinkled all on board with spray, the woman had opened her
dark eyes, looked kindly at the old man, and at the young fellow,
and at the scene in general--then set herself to recover her
bosom.

"Nay," the young fellow had cried as he interposed to remove her
hands. "There is no need for that, there is no need for that.
Let them ALL look."

**************************************************

Such the memories that came back to my recollection that night.
Gladly I would have recounted them to my companions, but,
unfortunately, these had, by now, succumbed to slumber. The ex-
soldier, resting in a sitting posture, and snoring loudly, had
his back prised against his wallet, his head sloped sideways, and
his hands clasped upon his knees, while Vasili was lying on his
back with his face turned upwards, his hands clasped behind his
head, his dark, finely moulded brows raised a little, and his
moustache erect. Also, he was weeping in his sleep--tears were
coursing down his brown, sunburnt cheeks; tears which, in the
moonlight, had in them something of the greenish tint of a
chrysolite or sea water, and which, on such a manly face, looked
strange indeed!

Still the rivulet was purling as it flowed, and the fire
crackling; while bathed in the red glow of the flames there was
sitting, bent forward, the dark, stonelike figure of the
Molokans' watchman, with the axe at his feet reflecting the
radiant gleam of the moon in the sky above us.

All the earth seemed to be sleeping as ever the waning stars
seemed to draw nearer and nearer. . . .

The slow length of the next day was dragged along amid an inertia
born of the moist heat, the song of the river, and the
intoxicating scents of forest and flowers. In short, one felt
inclined to do nothing, from morn till night, save roam the
defile without the exchanging of a word, the conceiving of a
desire, or the formulating of a thought.

At sunset, when we were engaged in drinking tea by the fire, the
ex-soldier remarked:

"I hope that life in the next world will exactly resemble life
in this spot, and be just as quiet and peaceful and immune from
work. Here one needs but to sit and melt like butter and suffer
neither from wrong nor anxiety."

Then, as carefully he withdrew his pipe from his lips, and
sighed, he added:

"Aye! If I could but feel sure that life in the next world will
be like life here, I would pray to God: 'For Christ's sake take
my soul at the earliest conceivable moment.'"

"What might suit YOU would not suit ME," Vasili thoughtfully
observed. "I would not always live such a life as this. I might
do so for a time, but not in perpetuity."

"Ah, but never have you worked hard," grunted the ex-soldier.

In every way the evening resembled the previous one; there were
to be observed the same luscious flooding of the defile with
dove-coloured mist, the same flashing of the silver crags in the
roseate twilight, the same rocking of the dense, warm forest's
soft, leafy tree-tops, the same softening of the rocks' outlines
in the gloom, the same gradual uplift of shadows, the same
chanting of the "matchmaking" river, the same routine on the
part of the big, sleek carpenters around the barraque--a routine
as slow and ponderous in its course as the movements of a drove
of wild boars.

More than once during the off hours of the day had we sought to
make the carpenters' acquaintance, to start a conversation with
them, but always their answers had been given reluctantly, in
monosyllables, and never had a discussion seemed likely to get
under way without the whiteheaded foreman shouting to the
particular member of the gang concerned: " Hi, you, Pavlushka!
Get back to work, there! " Indeed, he, the foreman, had outdone
all in his manifestations of dislike for our friendship, and as
monotonously as though he had been minded to rival the rivulet as
a songster, he had hummed his pious ditties, or else raised his
snuffling voice to sing them with an ever-importunate measure of
insistence, so that all day long those ditties had been coursing
their way in a murky, melancholy-compelling flood. Indeed, as the
foreman had stepped cautiously on thin legs from stone to stone
during his ceaseless inspection of the work of his men, he had
come to seem to have for his object the describing of an
invisible, circular path, as a means of segregating us more
securely than ever from the society of the carpenters.

Personally, however, I had no desire to converse with him, for
his frozen eyes chilled and repelled me and from the moment when
I had approached him, and seen him fold his hands behind him, and
recoil a step as he inquired with suppressed sternness, "What do
you want?" there had fallen away from me all further ambition to
learn the nature of the songs which he sang.

The ex-soldier gazed at him resentfully, then said with an oath:

"The old wizard and pilferer! Take my word for it that a lump of
piety like that has got a pretty store put away somewhere."

Whereafter, as he lit his pipe and squinted in the direction of
the carpenters, he added with stifled wrath:

"The airs that the 'elect' give themselves--the sons of
bitches! "

"It is always so," commented Vasili with a resentment equal to
the last speaker's. "Yes, no sooner, with us, does a man
accumulate a little money than he sticks his nose in the air, and
falls to thinking himself a real barin."

"Why is it that you always say 'With us,' and 'Among us,' and so
on?"

"Among us Russians, then, if you like it better."

"I do like it better. For you are not a German, are you, nor a
Tartar?"

"No. It is merely that I can see the faults in our Russian
folk."

Upon that (not for the first time) the pair plunged into a
discussion which had come so to weary them that now they spoke
only indifferently, without effort.

"The word 'faults' is, I consider, an insult," began the ex-
soldier as he puffed at his pipe. "Besides, you don't speak
consistently. Only this moment I observed a change in your
terms."

"To what?"

"To the term 'Russians.'"

"What should you prefer?"

A new sound floated into the defile as from some point on the
steppe the sound of a bell summoning folk to the usual Saturday
vigil service. Removing his pipe from his mouth, the ex-soldier
listened for a moment or two. Then, at the third and last stroke
of the bell, he doffed his cap, crossed himself with punctilious
piety, and said:

"There are not very many churches in these parts."

Whereafter he threw a glance across the river, and added
venomously:

"Those devils THERE don't cross themselves, the accursed Serbs!"

Vasili looked at him, twisted a left-hand moustache, smoothed it
again, regarded for a moment the sky and the defile, and sank his
head.

"The trouble with me," he remarked in an undertone, "is that I
can never remain very long in one place--always I keep fancying
that I shall meet with better things elsewhere, always I keep
hearing a bird singing in my heart, 'Do you go further, do you
go further.'"

"That bird sings in the heart of EVERY man," the ex-soldier
growled sulkily.

With a glance at us both, Vasili laughed a subdued laugh.

"'In the heart of every man'? " he repeated. "Why, such a
statement is absurd. For it means, does it not, that every one of
us is an idler, every one of us is constantly waiting for
something to turn up--that, in fact, no one of us is any better
than, or able to do any better than, the folk whose sole
utterance is 'Give unto us, pray give unto us'? Yes, if that be
the case, it is an unfortunate case indeed!"

And again he laughed. Yet his eyes were sorrowful, and as the
fingers of his right hand lay upon his knee they twitched as
though they were longing to grasp something unseen.

The ex-soldier frowned and snorted. For my own part, however, I
felt troubled for, and sorry for, Vasili. Presently he rose,
broke into a soft whistle, and moved away by the side of the
stream.

"His head is not quite right," muttered the ex-soldier as he
winked in the direction of the retreating figure. "Yes, I tell
you that straight, for from the first it was clear to me.
Otherwise, what could his words in depredation of Russia mean,
when of Russia nothing the least hard or definite can be said?
Who really knows her? What is she in reality, seeing that each of
her provinces is a soul to itself, and no one could state which
of the two Holy Mothers stands nearest to God--the Holy Mother of
Smolensk, or the Holy Mother of Kazan? "

For a while the speaker sat scraping greasy deposit from the
bottom and sides of the kettle; and all that while he grumbled as
though he had a grudge against someone. At length, however, he
assumed an attitude of attention, with his neck stretched out as
though to listen to some sound.

"Hist!" was his exclamation.

What then followed, followed as unexpectedly as when, like an
evil bird, a summer whirlwind suddenly sweeps up from the
horizon, and discharges a bluish-black cloud in torrents of rain
and hail, until everything is overwhelmed and battered to mud.

That is to say, with much din of whistling and other sounds there
now came pouring into the defile, and began to ascend the trail
beside the stream, a straggling procession of some thirty workmen
with, gleaming dully in the hands of their leading files, flagons
of vodka, and, suspended on the backs and shoulders of others,
wallets and bags of bread and other comestibles, and, in two
instances, poised on the heads of yet other processionists, large
black cauldrons the effect of which was to make their bearers
look like mushrooms.

"A vedro [2 3/4 gallons] and a half to the cauldron!" whispered
the ex-soldier with a computative grunt as he gained his feet.

"Yes, a vedro and a half," he repeated. As he spoke the tip of
his tongue protruded until it rested on the under-lip of his
half-opened mouth. In his face there was a curiously thirsty,
gross expression, and his attitude, as he stood there, was that
of one who had just received a blow, and was about to cry out in
consequence.

Meanwhile the defile rumbled like a barrel into which heavy
weights are being dropped, for one of the newcomers was beating
an empty tin pail, and another one whistling in a manner the
tossed echoes of which drowned even the rivulet's murmur as
nearer and nearer came the mob of men, a mob clad variously in
black, grey, or russet, with sleeves rolled up, and heads, in
many cases, bare save for their own towsled, dishevelled locks,
and bodies bent with fatigue, or carried stumblingly along on
legs bowed outwards. Meanwhile, as the dull, polyphonous roar of
voices swept through the neck of the defile, a man shouted in
broken, but truculent, accents:

"I say no! Fiddlesticks! Not a man is there who could drink more
than a vedro of 'blood-and-sweat' in a day."

"A man could drink a lake of it."

"No, a vedro and a half. That is the proper reckoning."

"Aye, a vedro and a half." And the ex-soldier, as he repeated
the words, spoke both as though he were an expert in the matter
and as though he felt for the matter a touch of respect. Then,
lurching forward like a man pushed by the scruff of the neck, he
crossed the rivulet, intercepted the crowd, and became swallowed
up in its midst.

Around the barraque the carpenters (the foreman ever glimmering
among them) were hurriedly collecting tools. Presently Vasili
returned--his right hand thrust into his pocket, and his left
holding his cap.

"Before long those fellows will be properly drunk! " he said
with a frown. "Ah, that vodka of ours! It is a perfect curse!"
Then to me: "Do YOU drink?"

"No," I replied.

"Thank God for that! If one does not drink one will never really
get into trouble."

For a moment he gazed gloomily in the direction of the newcomers.
Then he said without moving, without even looking at me:

"You have remarkable eyes, young fellow. Also, they seem
familiar to me--I have seen them somewhere before. Possibly that
happened in a dream, though I cannot be sure. Where do you come
from?"

I answered, but, after scanning me perplexedly, he shook his
head.

"No," he remarked. "I have never visited that part of the
country, or indeed, been so far from home."

"But this place is further still?"

"Further still?"

"Yes--from Kursk."

He laughed.

"I must tell you the truth," he said. "I am not a Kurskan at
all, but a Pskovian. The reason why I told the ex-soldier that I
was from Kursk was that I neither liked him nor cared to tell him
the whole truth-he was not worth the trouble. And as for my real
name, it is Paul, not Vasili--Paul Nikolaev Silantiev-- and is so
marked on my passport (for a passport, and a passport quite in
order, I have got)."

"And why are you on your travels? "

"For the reason that I am so--I can say no more. I look back from
a given place, and wave my hand, and am gone again as a feather
floats before the wind."

***************************

"Silence!" a threatening voice near the barraque broke in. "I
am the foreman here."

The voice of the ex-soldier replied:

"What workmen are these of yours? They are mere sectarians,
fellows who are for ever singing hymns."

To which someone else added:

"Besides, old devil that you are, aren't you bound to finish all
building work before the beginning of a Sunday?"

"Let us throw their tools into the stream."

"Yes, and start a riot," was Silantiev's comment as he squatted
before the embers of the fire.

Around the barraque, picked out against the yellow of its
framework, a number of dark figures were surging to and fro as
around a conflagration. Presently we heard something smashed to
pieces--at all events, we heard the cracking and scraping of wood
against stone, and then the strident, hilarious command:

"Hold on there! I'LL soon put things to rights! Carpenters, just
hand over the saw!"

Apparently there were three men in charge of the proceedings: the
one a red-bearded muzhik in a seaman's blouse; the second a tall
man with hunched shoulders, thin legs, and long arms who kept
grasping the foreman by the collar, shaking him, and bawling,
"Where are your lathes? Bring them out!" (while noticeable also
was a broad-shouldered young fellow in a ragged red shirt who
kept thrusting pieces of scantling through the windows of the
barraque, and shouting, "Catch hold of these! Lay them out in a
row!"); and the third the ex-soldier himself. The last-named, as
he jostled his way among the crowd, kept vociferating, viciously,
virulently, and with a curious system of division of his
syllables:

"Aha-a, ra-abble, secta-arians. Yo-ou would have nothing to say
to me, you Se-erbs! Yet I say to YOU: Go along, my chickens, for
the re-est of us are ti-ired of you, and come to sa-ay so!"

"What does he want?" asked Silantiev quietly as he lit a
cigarette. "Vodka? Oh, THEY'LL give him vodka! . . . Yet are you
not sorry for fellows of that stamp?"

Through the blue tobacco-smoke he gazed into the glowing embers;
until at last he took a charred stick, and collected the embers
into a heap glowing red-gold like a bouquet of fiery poppies; and
as he did so, his handsome eyes gleamed with just such a reverent
affection, such a prayerful kindliness, as must have lurked in
the eyes of primeval, nomadic man in the presence of the dancing,
beneficent source of light and heat.

"At least I am sorry for such fellows," Vasili continued.
"Aye, the very thought of the many, many folk who have come to
nothing! The very thought of it! Terrible, terrible!"

A touch of daylight was still lingering on the tops of the
mountains, but in the defile itself night was beginning to loom,
and to lull all things to sleep--to incline one neither to speak
oneself nor to listen to the dull clamour of those others on the
opposite bank, where even to the murmur of the rivulet the
distasteful din seemed to communicate a note of anger.

There the crowd had lit a huge bonfire, and then added to it a
second one which, crackling, hissing, and emitting coils of
bluish-tinted smoke, had fallen to vying with its fellow in
lacing the foam of the rivulet with muslin-like patterns in red.
As the mass of dark figures surged between the two flares an
hilarious voice shouted to us the invitation:

"Come over here, you! Don't be backward! Come over here, I say!"

Upon which followed a clatter as of the smashing of a drinking-
vessel, while from the red-bearded muzhik came a thick, raucous
shout of:

"These fellows needed to be taught a lesson!"

Almost at the same moment the foreman of the carpenters broke his
way clear of the crowd, and, carefully crossing the rivulet by
the stepping-stones which we had constructed, squatted down upon
his heels by the margin, and with much puffing and blowing fell
to rinsing his face, a face which in the murky firelight looked
flushed and red.

"I think that someone has given him a blow," hazarded Silantiev
sotto voce.

And when the foreman rose to approach us this proved to be the
case, for then we saw that dripping from his nose, and meandering
over his moustache and soaked white beard, there was a stream of
dark blood which had spotted and streaked his shirt-front.

"Peace to this gathering!" he said gravely as, pressing his
left hand to his stomach, he bowed.

"And we pray your indulgence," was Silantiev's response, though
he did not raise his eyes as he spoke. "Pray be seated."

Small, withered, and, for all but his blood-stained shirt,
scrupulously clean, the old man reminded me of certain pictures
of old-time hermits, and the more so since either pain or shame
or the gleam of the firelight had caused his hitherto dead eyes
to gather life and grow brighter--aye, and sterner. Somehow, as I
looked at him, I felt awkward and abashed.

A cough twisted his broad nose. Then he wiped his beard on the
palm of his hand, and his hand on his knee; whereafter, as he
stretched forth the pair of senile, dark-coloured hands, and held
them over the embers, he said:

"How cold the water of the rivulet is! It is absolutely icy."

With a glance from under his brows Silantiev inquired:

"Are you very badly hurt?"

"No. Merely a man caught me a blow on the bridge of the nose,
where the blood flows readily. Yet, as God knows, he will gain
nothing by his act, whereas the suffering which he has caused me
will go to swell my account with the Holy Spirit."

As the man spoke he glanced across the rivulet. On the opposite
bank two men were staggering along, and drunkenly bawling the
tipsy refrain:

"In the du-u-uok let me die,
In the au-autumn time!"

"Aye, long is it since I received a blow," the old man
continued, scanning the two revellers from under his hand.
"Twenty years it must be since last I did so. And now the blow was
struck for nothing, for no real fault.. You see, I have been
allowed no nails for the doing of the work, and have been obliged
to make use of wooden clamps for most of it, while battens also
have not been forthcoming; and, this being so, it was through no
remissness of mine that the work could not be finished by sunset
tonight. I suspect, too, that, to eke out its wages, that rabble
has been thieving, with the eldest leading the rest. And that,
again, is not a thing for which I can be held responsible. True,
this is a Government job, and some of those fellows are young,
and young, hungry fellows such as they will (may they be
forgiven!) steal, since everyone hankers to get something in
return for a very little. But, once more, how is that my fault?
Yes, that rabble must be a regular set of rascals! Just now they
deprived my eldest son of a saw, of a brand-new saw; and
thereafter they spilt my blood, the blood of a greybeard!"

Here his small, grey face contracted into wrinkles, and, closing
his eyes, he sobbed a dry, grating sob.

Silantiev fidgeted--then sighed. Presently the old man looked at
him, blew his nose, wiped his hand upon his trousers, and said
quietly:

"Somewhere, I think, I have seen you before."

"That is so. You saw me one evening when I visited your
settlement for the mending of a thresher."

"Yes, yes. That is where I DID see you. It was you, was it not?
Well, do you still disagree with me? "

To which the old man added with a nod and a smile:

"See how well I remember your words! You are, I imagine, still
of the same opinion?"

"How should I not be?" responded Silantiev dourly.

"Ah, well! Ah, well!"

And the old man stretched his hands over the fire once more,
discoloured hands the thumbs of which were curiously bent
outwards and splayed, and, seemingly, unable to move in harmony
with the fingers.

The ex-soldier shouted across the river:

"The land here is easy to work, and makes the people lazy. Who
would care to live in such a region? Who would care to come to
it? Much rather would I go and earn a living on difficult land."

The old man paid no heed, but said to Silantiev--said to him with
an austere, derisive smile:

"Do you STILL think it necessary to struggle against what has
been ordained of God? Do you STILL think that long-suffering is
bad, and resistance good? Young man, your soul is weak indeed:
and remember that it is only the soul that can overcome Satan."

In response Silantiev rose to his feet, shook his fist at the old
man, and shouted in a rough, angry voice, a voice that was not
his own:

"All that I have heard before, and from others besides yourself.
The truth is that I hold all you father-confessors in abhorrence.
"Moreover," (this last was added with a violent oath) "it is not
Satan that needs to be resisted, but such devil's ravens, such
devil's vampires, as YOU."

Which said, he kicked a stone away from the fire, thrust his
hands into his pockets, and turned slowly on his heel, with his
elbows pressed close to his sides. Nevertheless the old man,
still smiling, said to me in an undertone:

"He is proud, but that will not last for long."

"Why not?"

"Because I know in advance that--"

Breaking off short, he turned his head upon his shoulder, and sat
listening to some shouting that was going on across the river.
Everyone in that quarter was drunk, and, in particular, someone
could be heard bawling in a tone of challenge:

"Oh? I, you say? A-a-ah! Then take that!"

Silantiev, stepping lightly from stone to stone, crossed the
river. Then he mingled--a conspicuous figure (owing to his
apparent handlessness)--with the crowd. Somehow, on his departure,
I felt ill at ease.

Twitching his fingers as though performing a conjuring trick, the
old man continued to sit with his hands stretched over the
embers. By this time his nose had swollen over the bridge, and
bruises risen under his eyes which tended to obscure his vision.
Indeed, as he sat there, sat mouthing with dark, bestreaked lips
under a covering of hoary beard and moustache, I found that his
bloodstained, disfigured, wrinkled, as it were "antique" face
reminded me more than ever of those of great sinners of ancient
times who abandoned this world for the forest and the desert.

"I have seen many proud folk," he continued with a shake of his
hatless head and its sparse hairs. "A fire may burn up quickly,
and continue to burn fiercely, yet, like these embers, become
turned to ashes, and. so lie smouldering till dawn. Young man,
there you have something to think of. Nor are they merely my
words. They are the words of the Holy Gospel itself."

Ever descending, ever weighing more heavily upon us, the night
was as black and hot and stifling as the previous one had been,
albeit as kindly as a mother. Still the two fires on the opposite
bank of the rivulet were aflame, and sending hot blasts of vapour
across a seeming brook of gold.

Folding his arms upon his breast, the old man tucked the palms of
his hands into his armpits, and settled himself more comfortably.
Nevertheless, when I made as though to add more twigs and
shavings to the embers he exclaimed imperiously:

"There is no need for that."

"Why is there not? "

"Because that would cause the fire to be seen, and bring some of
those men over here."

Again, as he kicked away some boughs which I had just broken up,
he repeated:

"There is no need for that, I tell you."

Presently, there approached us through the shimmering fire light
on the opposite bank two carpenters with boxes on their backs,
and axes in their hands.

"Are all the rest of our men gone?" inquired the foreman of the
newcomers.

"Yes," replied one of them, a tall man with a drooping moustache
and no beard.

"Well, 'shun evil, and good will result.'"

"Aye, and we likewise wish to depart."

"But a task ought not to be left unfinished. At dinner-time I
sent Olesha to say that none of those fellows had better be
released from work; but released they have been, and now the
result is apparent! Presently, when they have drunk a little more
of their poison, they will fire the barraque."

Every time that the first of the two carpenters inhaled the smoke
of my cigarette he spat into the embers, while the other man, a
young fellow as plump as a female baker, sank his towsled head
upon his breast as soon as he sat down, and fell asleep.

Next, the clamour across the rivulet subsided for awhile. But
suddenly I heard the ex-soldier exclaim in drunken, singsong
accents which came from the very centre of the tumult:

"Hi, do you answer me! How comes it that you have no respect for
Russia? Is not Riazan a part of Russia? What is Russia, then, I
should like to know? "

"A tavern," the foreman commented quietly; whereafter, turning
to me, he added more loudly:

"I say this of such fellows-- that a tavern... But what a noise
those roisterers are making, to be sure!"

The young fellow in the red shirt had just shouted:

"Hi, there, soldier! Seize him by the throat! Seize him, seize
him!"

While from Silantiev had come the gruff retort:

"What? Do you suppose that you are hunting a pack of hounds?"

"Here, answer me!" was the next shouted utterance--it came from
the ex-soldier-- whereupon the old man remarked to me in an
undertone:

"It would seem that a fight is brewing."

Rising, I moved in the direction of the uproar. As I did so, I
heard the old man say softly to his companions:

"He too is gone, thank God!"

Suddenly there surged towards me from the opposite bank a crowd
of men. Belching, hiccuping, and grunting, they seemed to be
carrying or dragging in their midst some heavy weight. Presently
a woman's voice screamed, "Ya-av-sha!" and other voices raised
mingled shouts of "Throw him in! Give him a thrashing!" and
"Drag him along!"

The next moment we saw Silantiev break out of the crowd,
straighten himself, swing his right fist in the air, and hurl
himself at the crowd again. As he did so the young fellow in the
red shirt raised a gigantic arm, and there followed the sound of
a muffled, grisly blow. Staggering backwards, Silantiev slid
silently into the water, and lay there at my feet.

"That's right!" was the comment of someone.

For a moment or two the clamour subsided a little, and during
that moment or two one's ears once more became laved with the
sweet singsong of the river. Shortly afterwards someone threw
into the water a huge stone, and someone else laughed in a dull
way.

As I was bending to look at Silantiev some of the men jostled me.
Nevertheless, I continued to struggle to raise him from the spot
where, half in and half out of the water, he lay with his head
and breast resting against the stepping-stones.

"You have killed him!" next I shouted--not because I believed
the statement to be true, but because I had a mind to frighten
into sobriety the men who were impeding me.

Upon this someone exclaimed in a faltering, sobered tone:

"Surely not?"

As for the young fellow in the red shirt, he passed me by with a
braggart, resentful shout of:

"Well? He had no right to insult me. Why should he have said
that I was a nuisance to the whole country?"

And someone else shouted:

"Where is the ex-soldier? Who is the watchman here?"

"Bring a light," was the cry of a third.

Yet all these voices were more sober, more subdued, more
restrained than they had been, and presently a little muzhik
whose poll was swathed in a red handkerchief stooped and raised
Silantiev's head. But almost as instantly he let it fall again,
and, dipping his hands into the water, said gravely:

"You have killed him. He is dead."

At the moment I did not believe the words; but presently, as I
stood watching how the water coursed between Silantiev's legs,
and turned them this way and that, and made them stir as though
they were striving to divest themselves of the shabby old boots,
I realised with all my being that the hands which were resting in
mine were the hands of a corpse. And, true enough, when I
released them they slapped down upon the surface like wet dish-
cloths.

Until now, about a dozen men had been standing on the bank to
observe what was toward, but as soon as the little muzhik's words
rang out these men recoiled, and, with jostlings, began to vent,
in subdued, uneasy tones, cries of:

"Who was it first struck him?"

"This will lose us our jobs."

"It was the soldier that first started the racket."

"Yes, that is true."

"Let us go and denounce him."

As for the young fellow in the red shirt, he cried:

"I swear on my honour, mates, that the affair was only a
quarrel."

"To hit a man with a bludgeon is more than a quarrel."

"It was a stone that was used, not a bludgeon."

"The soldier ought to--"

A woman's high-pitched voice broke in with a plaintive cry of:

"Good Lord! Always something happens to us! "

As for myself, I felt stunned and hurt as I seated myself upon
the stepping-stones; and though everything was plain to my sight,
nothing was plain to my understanding, while in my breast a
strange emptiness was present, save that the clamour of the
bystanders aroused me to a certain longing to outshout them all,
to send forth my voice into the night like the voice of a brazen
trumpet.

Presently two other men approached us. In the hand of the first
was a torch which he kept waving to and fro to prevent its being
extinguished, and whence, therefore, he kept strewing showers of
golden sparks. A fair-headed little fellow, he had a body as thin
as a pike when standing on its tail, a grey, stonelike
countenance that was deeply sunken between the shoulders, a mouth
perpetually half-agape, and round, owlish-looking eyes.

As he approached the corpse he bent forward with one hand upon
his knee to throw the more light upon Silantiev's bruised head
and body. That head was resting turned upon the shoulder, and no
longer could I recognise the once handsome Cossack face, so
buried was the jaunty forelock under a clot of black-red mud, and
concealed by a swelling which had made its appearance above the
left ear. Also, since the mouth and moustache had been bashed
aside the teeth lay bared in a twisted, truly horrible smile,
while, as the most horrible point of all, the left eye was
hanging from its socket, and, become hideously large, gazing,
seemingly, at the inner pocket of the flap of Silantiev's pea-
jacket, whence there was protruding a white edging of paper.

Slowly the torch holder described a circle of fire in the air,
and thereby sprinkled a further shower of sparks over the poor
mutilated face, with its streaks of shining blood. Then he
muttered with a smack of the lips:

"You can see for yourselves who the man is."

As he spoke a few more sparks descended upon Silantiev's scalp
and wet cheeks, and went out, while the flare's reflection so
played in the ball of Silantiev's eye as to communicate to it an
added appearance of death.

Finally the torch holder straightened his back, threw his torch
into the river, expectorated after it, and said to his companion
as he smoothed a flaxen poll which, in the darkness, looked
almost greenish:

"Do you go to the barraque, and tell them that a man has been
done to death."

"No; I should be afraid to go alone."

"Come, come! Nothing is there to be afraid of. Go, I tell you."

"But I would much rather not."

"Don't be such a fool!"

Suddenly there sounded over my head the quiet voice of the
foreman.

"I will accompany you," he said. Then he added disgustedly as he
scraped his foot against a stone:

"How horrible the blood smells! It would seem that my very foot
is smeared with it."

With a frown the fair-headed muzhik eyed him, while the foreman
returned the muzhik's gaze with a scrutiny that never wavered.
Finally the elder man commented with cold severity:

"All the mischief has come of vodka and tobacco, the devil's
drugs."

Not only were the pair strangely alike, but both of them
strangely resembled wizards, in that both were short of stature,
as sharp-finished as gimlets, and as green-tinted by the darkness
as tufts of lichen.

"Let us go, brother," the foreman said. "Go we with the Holy
Spirit."

And, omitting even to inquire who had been killed, or even to
glance at the corpse, or even to pay it the last salute demanded
of custom, the foreman departed down the stream, while in his
wake followed the messenger, a man who kept stumbling as he
picked his way from stone to stone. Amid the gloom the pair moved
as silently as ghosts.

The narrow-chested, fair-headed little muzhik then raked me with
his eyes; whereafter he produced a cigarette from a tin box,
snapped-to the lid of the box, struck a match (illuminating once
more the face of the dead man), and applied the flame to the
cigarette. Lastly he said:

"This is the sixth murder which I have seen one thing and
another commit."

"One thing and another commit?" I queried.

The reply came only after a pause; when the little muzhik asked:
" What did you say? I did not quite catch it."

I explained that human beings, not inanimate entities, murdered
human beings.

"Well, be they human beings or machinery or lightning or
anything else, they are all one. One of my mates was caught in
some machinery at Bakhmakh. Another one had his throat cut in a
brawl. Another one was crushed against the bucket in a coal mine.
Another one was--"

Carefully though the man counted, he ended by erring in his
reckoning to the extent of making his total "five." Accordingly
he re-computed the list--and this time succeeded in making the
total amount to "seven."

"Never mind," he remarked with a sigh as he blew his cigarette
into a red glow which illuminated the whole of his face. "The
truth is that I cannot always repeat the list correctly, just as
I should like. Were I older than I am, I too should contrive to
get finished off; for old-age is a far from desirable thing. Yes,
indeed! But, as things are, I am still alive, nor, thank the
Lord, does anything matter very much."

Presently, with a nod towards Silantiev, he continued:

"Even now HIS kinsfolk or his wife may be looking for news of
him, or a letter from him. Well, never again will he write, and
as likely as not his kinsfolk will end by saying to themselves:
'He has taken to bad ways, and forgotten his family.' Yes, good
sir."

By this time the clamour around the barraque had ceased, and the
two fires had burnt themselves out, and most of the men
dispersed. From the smooth yellow walls of the barraque dark,
round, knot-holes were gazing at the rivulet like eyes. Only in a
single window without a frame was there visible a faint light,
while at intervals there issued thence fragmentary, angry
exclamations such as:

"Look sharp there, and deal! Clubs will be the winners."

"Ah! Here is a trump!"

"Indeed? What luck, damn it!"

The fair-headed muzhik blew the ashes from his cigarette, and
observed:

"No such thing is there at cards as luck--only skill."

At this juncture we saw approaching us softly from across the
rivulet a young carpenter who wore a moustache. He halted beside
us, and drew a deep breath.

"Well, mate?" the fair-headed muzhik inquired.

"Would you mind giving me something to smoke?" the carpenter
asked. The obscurity caused him to look large and shapeless,
though his manner of speaking was bashful and subdued.

"Certainly. Here is a cigarette."

"Christ reward you! Today my wife forgot to bring my tobacco,
and my grandfather has strict ideas on the subject of smoking."

"Was it he who departed just now? It was."

As the carpenter inhaled a whiff he continued:

"I suppose that man was beaten to death?"

"He was--to death."

For a while the pair smoked in silence. The hour was past
midnight.

Over the defile the jagged strip of sky which roofed it looked
like a river of blue flowing at an immense height above the
night-enveloped earth, and bearing the brilliant stars on its
smooth current.

Quieter and quieter was everything growing; more and more was
everything becoming part of the night....

One might have thought that nothing particular had happened.



KALININ

Whistling from off the sea, the wind was charged with moist, salt
spray, and dashing foaming billows ashore with their white manes
full of snakelike, gleaming black ribands of seaweed, and causing
the rocks to rumble angrily in response, and the trees to rustle
with a dry, agitated sound as their tops swayed to and fro, and
their trunks bent earthwards as though they would fain reeve up
their roots, and betake them whither the mountains stood veiled
in a toga of heavy, dark mist.

Over the sea the clouds were hurrying towards the land as ever
and anon they rent themselves into strips, and revealed
fathomless abysses of blue wherein the autumn sun burned
uneasily, and sent cloud-shadows gliding over the puckered waste
of waters, until, the shore reached, the wind further harried the
masses of vapour towards the sharp flanks of the mountains, and,
after drawing them up and down the slopes, relegated them to
clefts, and left them steaming there.

There was about the whole scene a louring appearance, an
appearance as though everything were contending with everything,
as now all things turned sullenly dark, and now all things
emitted a dull sheen which almost blinded the eyes. Along the
narrow road, a road protected from the sea by a line of wave-
washed dykes, some withered leaves of oak and wild cherry were
scudding in mutual chase of one another; with the general result
that the combined sounds of splashing and rustling and howling
came to merge themselves into a single din which issued as a song
with a rhythm marked by the measured blows of the waves as they
struck the rocks.

"Zmiulan, the King of the Ocean, is abroad!" shouted my fellow
traveller in my ear. He was a tall, round-shouldered man of
childishly chubby features and boyishly bright, transparent eyes.

"WHO do you say is abroad?" I queried.

"King Zmiulan."

Never having heard of the monarch, I made no reply.

The extent to which the wind buffeted us might have led one to
suppose that its primary objective was to deflect our steps, and
turn them in the direction of the mountains. Indeed, at times its
pressure was so strong that we had no choice but to halt, to turn
our backs to the sea, and, with feet planted apart, to prise
ourselves against our sticks, and so remain, poised on three
legs, until we were past any risk of being overwhelmed with the
soft incubus of the tempest, and having our coats torn from our
shoulders.

At intervals such gasps would come from my companion that he
might well have been standing on the drying-board of a bath. Nor,
as they did so, was his appearance aught but comical, seeing that
his ears, appendages large and shaggy like a dog's, and
indifferently shielded with a shabby old cap, kept being pushed
forward by the wind until his small head bore an absurd
resemblance to a china bowl. And that, to complete the
resemblance, his long and massive nose, a feature grossly
disproportionate to the rest of his diminutive face, might
equally well have passed for the spout of the receptacle
indicated.

Yet a face out of the common it was, like the whole of his
personality. And this was the fact which had captivated me from
the moment when I had beheld him participating in a vigil service
held in the neighbouring church of the monastery of New Athos.
There, spare, but with his withered form erect, and his head
slightly tilted, he had been gazing at the Crucifix with a
radiant smile, and moving his thin lips in a sort of whispered,
confidential, friendly conversation with the Saviour. Indeed, so
much had the man's smooth, round features (features as beardless
as those of a Skopetz [A member of the Skoptzi, a non-Orthodox
sect the members of which "do make of themselves eunuchs for the
Lord's sake."], save for two bright tufts at the corners of the
mouth) been instinct with intimacy, with a consciousness of
actually being in the presence of the Son of God, that the
spectacle, transcending anything of the kind that my eyes had
before beheld, had led me, with its total absence of the
customary laboured, servile, pusillanimous attitude towards the
Almighty which I had generally found to be the rule, to accord
the man my whole interest, and, as long as the service had
lasted, to keep an eye upon one who could thus converse with God
without rendering Him constant obeisance, or again and again
making the sign of the cross, or invariably making it to the
accompaniment of groans and tears which had always hitherto
obtruded itself upon my notice.

Again had I encountered the man when I had had supper at the
workmen's barraque, and then proceeded to the monastery's guest-
chamber. Seated at a table under a circle of light falling from a
lamp suspended from the ceiling, he had gathered around him a
knot of pilgrims and their women, and was holding forth in low,
cheerful tones that yet had in them the telling, incisive note of
the preacher, of the man who frequently converses with his fellow
men.

"One thing it may be best always to disclose," he was saying,
"and another thing to conceal. If aught in ourselves seems harmful
or senseless, let us put to ourselves the question: 'Why is this
so?' Contrariwise ought a prudent man never to thrust himself
forward and say: 'How discreet am I!' while he who makes a parade
of his hard lot, and says, 'Good folk, see ye and hear how bitter
my life is,' also does wrong."

Here a pilgrim with a black beard, a brigand's dark eyes, and the
wasted features of an ascetic rose from the further side of the
table, straightened his virile frame, and said in a dull voice:

"My wife and one of my children were burnt to death through the
falling of an oil lamp. On THAT ought I to keep silence?"

No answer followed. Only someone muttered to himself:

"What? Again?": until the first speaker, the speaker seated
near the corner of the table, launched into the oppressive lull
the unhesitating reply:

"That of which you speak may be taken to have been a punishment
by God for sin."

"What? For a sin committed by one three years of age (for,
indeed, my little son was no more)? The accident happened of his
pulling down a lamp upon himself, and of my wife seizing him, and
herself being burnt to death. She was weak, too, for but eleven
days had passed since her confinement."

"No. What I mean is that in that accident you see a punishment
for sins committed by the child's father and mother."

This reply from the corner came with perfect confidence. The
black-bearded man, however, pretended not to hear it, but spread
out his hands as though parting the air before him, and proceeded
hurriedly, breathlessly to detail the manner in which his wife
and little one had met their deaths. And all the time that he was
doing so one had an inkling that often before had he recounted
his narrative of horror, and that often again would he repeat it.
His shaggy black eyebrows, as he delivered his speech, met in a
single strip, while the whites of his eyes
grew bloodshot, and their dull, black pupils never ceased their
nervous twitching.

Presently the gloomy recital was once more roughly,
unceremoniously broken in upon by the cheerful voice of the
Christ-loving pilgrim.

"It is not right, brother," the voice said, "to blame God for
untoward accidents, or for mistakes and follies committed by
ourselves."

"But if God be God, He is responsible for all things."

"Not so. Concede to yourself the faculty of reason."

"Pah! What avails reason if it cannot make me understand?"

"Cannot make you understand WHAT?"

"The main point, the point why MY wife had to be burnt rather
than my neighbour's?"

Somewhere an old woman commented in spitefully distinct tones:

"Oh ho, ho! This man comes to a monastery, and starts railing as
soon as he gets there!"

Flashing his eyes angrily, the black-bearded man lowered his head
like a bull. Then, thinking better of his position, and
contenting himself with a gesture, he strode swiftly, heavily
towards the door. Upon this the Christ-loving pilgrim rose with a
swaying motion, bowed to everyone present, and set about
following his late interlocutor.

"It has all come of a broken heart," he said with a smile as he
passed me. Yet somehow the smile seemed to lack sympathy.

With a disapproving air someone else remarked:

"That fellow's one thought is to enlarge and to enlarge upon his
tale."

"Yes, and to no purpose does he do so," added the Christ-loving
pilgrim as he halted in the doorway. "All that he accomplishes by
it is to weary himself and others alike. Such experiences are far
better put behind one."

Presently I followed the pair into the forecourt, and near the
entrance-gates heard a voice say quietly:

"Do not disturb yourself, good father."

"Nevertheless" (the second voice was that of the porter of the
monastery, Father Seraphim, a strapping Vetlugan) "a spectre
walks here nightly."

"Never mind if it does. As regards myself, no spectre would
touch me."

Here I moved in the direction of the gates.

"Who comes there?" Seraphim inquired as he thrust a hairy and
uncouth, but infinitely kindly, face close to mine. "Oh, it is
the young fellow from Nizhni Novgorod! You are wasting your time,
my good sir, for the women have all gone to bed."

With which he laughed and chuckled like a bear.

Beyond the wall of the forecourt the stillness of the autumn
night was the languid inertia of a world exhausted by summer, and
the withered grass and other objects of the season were exhaling
a sweet and bracing odour, and the trees looking like fragments
of cloud where motionless they hung in the moist, sultry air.
Also, in the darkness the half-slumbering sea could be heard
soughing as it crept towards the shore while over the sky lay a
canopy of mist, save at the point where the moon's opal-like blur
could be descried over the spot where that blur's counterfeit
image glittered and rocked on the surface of the dark waters.

Under the trees there was set a bench whereon I could discern
there to be resting a human figure. Approaching the figure, I
seated myself beside it.

"Whence, comrade?" was my inquiry.

"From Voronezh. And you?"

A Russian is never adverse to talking about himself. It would seem
as though he is never sure of his personality, as though he is
ever yearning to have that personality confirmed from some source
other than, extraneous to, his own ego. The reason for this must
be that we Russians live diffused over a land of such vastness
that, the more we grasp the immensity of the same, the smaller do
we come to appear in our own eyes; wherefore, traversing, as we
do, roads of a length of a thousand versts, and constantly losing
our way, we come to let slip no opportunity of restating
ourselves, and setting forth all that we have seen and thought
and done.

Hence, too, must it be that in conversations one seems to hear
less of the note of "I am I" than of the note of "Am I really
and truly myself?"

"What may be your name?"  next I inquired of the figure on the
bench.

"A name of absolute simplicity--the name of Alexei Kalinin."

"You are a namesake of mine, then."

"Indeed? Is that so?"

With which, tapping me on the knee, the figure added:

"Come, then, namesake. 'I have mortar, and you have water, so
together let us paint the town.'"

Murmuring amid the silence could be heard small, light waves that
were no more than ripples. Behind us the busy clamour of the
monastery had died down, and even Kalinin's cheery voice seemed
subdued by the influence of the night--it seemed to have in it
less of the note of self-confidence.

"My mother was a wet-nurse," he went on to volunteer, and I her
only child. When I was twelve years of age I was, owing to my
height, converted into a footman. It happened thus. One day, on
General Stepan (my mother's then employer) happening to catch
sight of me, he exclaimed: 'Evgenia, go and tell Fedor' (the
ex-soldier who was then serving the General as footman) 'that he
is to teach your son to wait at table! The boy is at least tall
enough for the work.' And for nine years I served the General in
this capacity. And then, and then--oh, THEN I was seized with an
illness. . . . Next, I obtained a post under a merchant who was
then mayor of our town, and stayed with him twenty-one months.
And next I obtained a situation in an hotel at Kharkov, and held
it for a year. And after that I kept changing my places, for,
steady and sober though I was, I was beginning to lack taste for
my profession, and to develop a spirit of the kind which deemed
all work to be beneath me, and considered that I had been created
to serve only myself, not others."

Along the high road to Sukhum which lay behind us there were
proceeding some invisible travellers whose scraping of feet as
they walked proclaimed the fact that they were not over-used to
journeying on foot. Just as the party drew level with us, a
musical voice hummed out softly the line "Alone will I set forth
upon the road," with the word "alone" plaintively stressed.
Next, a resonant bass voice said with a sort of indolent
incisiveness:

"Aphon or aphonia means loss of speech to the extent of, to the
extent of--oh, to WHAT extent, most learned Vera Vasilievna?"

"To the extent of total loss of power of articulation," replied
a voice feminine and youthful of timbre.

Just at that moment we saw two dark, blurred figures, with a
paler figure between them, come gliding into view.

"Strange indeed is it that, that--"

"That what?"

"That so many names proper to these parts should also be so
suggestive. Take, for instance, Mount Nakopioba. Certainly folk
hereabouts seem to have " amassed " things, and to have known how
to do so." [The verb nakopit means to amass, to heap up.]

"For my part, I always fail to remember the name of Simon the
Canaanite. Constantly I find myself calling him 'the Cainite.'"

"Look here," interrupted the musical voice in a tone of
chastened enthusiasm. "As I contemplate all this beauty, and
inhale this restfulness, I find myself reflecting: 'How would it
be if I were to let everything go to the devil, and take up my
abode here for ever?'"

At this point all further speech became drowned by the sound of
the monastery's bell as it struck the hour. The only utterance
that came borne to my ears was the mournful fragment:

Oh, if into a single word
I could pour my inmost thoughts!

To the foregoing dialogue my companion had listened with his head
tilted to one side, much as though the dialogue had deflected it
in that direction: and now, as the voices died away into the
distance, he sighed, straightened himself, and said:

"Clearly those people were educated folk. And see too how, as
they talked of one thing and another, there cropped up the old
and ever-persistent point."

"To what point are you referring?"

My companion paused a moment before he replied. Then he said:

"Can it be that you did not hear it? Did you not hear one of
those people remark: 'I have a mind to surrender everything '?"

Whereafter, bending forward, and peering at me as a blind man
would do, Kalinin added in a half-whisper:

"More and more are folk coming to think to themselves: 'Now must
I forsake everything.' In the end I myself came to think it. For
many a year did I increasingly reflect: 'Why should I be a
servant? What will it ever profit me? Even if I should earn
twelve, or twenty, or fifty roubles a month, to what will such
earnings lead, and where will the man in me come in? Surely it
would be better to do nothing at all, but just to gaze into space
(as I am doing now), and let my eyes stare straight before me?'"

"By the way, what were you talking to those people about?"

"Which people do you mean?"

"The bearded man and the rest, the company in the guest-chamber?"

"Ah, THAT man I did not like--I have no fancy at all for fellows
who strew their grief about the world, and leave it to be
trampled upon by every chance-comer. For how can the tears of my
neighbour benefit me? True, every man has his troubles; but also
has every man such a predilection for his particular woe that he
ends by deeming it the most bitter and remarkable grief in the
universe--you may take my word for that."

Suddenly the speaker rose to his feet, a tall, lean figure.

"Now I must seek my bed," he remarked. "You see, I shall have
to leave here very early tomorrow."

"And for what point?"

"For Novorossisk."

Now, the day being a Saturday, I had drawn my week's earnings
from the monastery's pay-office just before the vigil service.
Also, Novorossisk did not really lie in my direction. Thirdly, I
had no particular wish to exchange the monastery for any other
lodging. Nevertheless, despite all this, the man interested me to
such an extent (of persons who genuinely interest one there never
exist but two, and, of them, oneself is always one) that
straightway I observed:

"I too shall be leaving here tomorrow."

"Then let us travel together."

*********************************

At dawn, therefore, we set forth to foot the road in company. At
times I mentally soared aloft, and viewed the scene from that
vantage-point. Whenever I did so, I beheld two tall men traversing
a narrow track by a seashore--the one clad in a grey military
overcoat and a hat with a broken crown, and the other in a drab
kaftan and a plush cap. At their feet the boundless sea was
splashing white foam, salt-dried ribands of seaweed were strewing
the path, golden leaves were dancing hither and thither, and the
wind was howling at, and buffeting, the travellers as clouds
sailed over their heads. Also, to their right there lay stretched
a chain of mountains towards which the clouds kept wearily,
nervelessly tending, while to their left there lay spread a
white-laced expanse over the surface of which a roaring wind kept
ceaselessly driving transparent columns of spray.

On such stormy days in autumn everything near a seashore looks
particularly cheerful and vigorous, seeing that, despite the
soughing of wind and wave, and the swift onrush of cloud, and the
fact that the sun is only occasionally to be seen suspended in
abysses of blue, and resembles a drooping flower, one feels that
the apparent chaos has lurking in it a secret harmony of mundane,
but imperishable, forces--so much so that in time even one's puny
human heart comes to imbibe the prevalent spirit of revolt, and,
catching fire, to cry to all the universe: " I love you! "

Yes, at such times one desires to taste life to the full, and so
to live that the ancient rocks shall smile, and the sea's white
horses prance the higher, as one's mouth acclaims the earth in
such a paean that, intoxicated with the laudation, it shall
unfold its riches with added bountifulness and display more and
more manifest beauty under the spur of the love expressed by one
of its creatures, expressed by a human being who feels for the
earth what he would feel for a woman, and yearns to fertilise the
same to ever-increasing splendour.

Nevertheless,words are as heavy as stones, and after felling
fancy to the ground, serve but to heap her grey coffin-lid, and
cause one, as one stands contemplating the tomb, to laugh in
sheer self-derision. . . .

Suddenly, plunged in dreams as I walked along, I heard through
the plash of the waves and the sizzle of the foam the unfamiliar
words:

"Hymen, Demon, Igamon, and Zmiulan. Good devils are these, not
bad."

"How does Christ get on with them?" I asked.

"Christ? He does not enter into the matter."

"Is He hostile to them?"

"Is He HOSTILE to them? How could He be? Devils of that kind are
devils to themselves-devils of a decent sort. Besides, to no one
is Christ hostile"  ..............................  . . . . . .
[In the Russian this hiatus occurs as marked.]


As though unable any longer to brave the assault of the billows,
the path suddenly swerved towards the bushes on our right, and,
in doing so, caused the cloud-wrapped mountains to shift
correspondingly to our immediate front, where the masses of
vapour were darkening as though rain were probable.

Kalinin's discourse proved instructive as with his stick he from
time to time knocked the track clear of clinging tendrils.

"The locality is not without its perils," once he remarked.
"For hereabouts there lurks malaria. It does so because long ago
Maliar of Kostroma banished his evil sister, Fever, to these
parts. Probably he was paid to do so, but the exact circumstances
escape my memory."

So thickly was the surface of the sea streaked with cloud-shadows
that it bore the appearance of being in mourning, of being decked
in the funeral colours of black and white. Afar off, Gudaout lay
lashed with foam, while constantly objects like snowdrifts kept
gliding towards it.

"Tell me more about those devils," I said at length.

"Well, if you wish. But what exactly am I to tell you about
them?"

"All that you may happen to know."

"Oh, I know EVERYTHING about them."

To this my companion added a wink. Then he continued:

"I say that I know everything about those devils for the reason
that for my mother I had a most remarkable woman, a woman
cognisant of each and every species of proverb, anathema, and
item of hagiology. You must know that, after spreading my bed
beside the kitchen stove each night, and her own bed on the top
of the stove (for, after her wet-nursing of three of the
General's children, she lived a life of absolute ease, and did no
work at all)--"

Here Kalinin halted, and, driving his stick into the ground,
glanced back along the path before resuming his way with firm,
lengthy strides.

"I may tell you that the General had a niece named Valentina
Ignatievna. And she too was a most remarkable woman."

"Remarkable for what?"

"Remarkable for EVERYTHING."

At this moment there came floating over our heads through the
damp-saturated air a cormorant--one of those voracious birds which
so markedly lack intelligence. And somehow the whistling of its
powerful pinions awoke in me an unpleasant reminiscent thought.

"Pray continue," I said to my fellow traveller.

And each night, as I lay on the floor (I may mention that never
did I climb on to the stove, and to this day I dislike the heat
of one), it was her custom to sit with her legs dangling over the
edge of the top, and tell me stories. And though the room would
be too dark for me to see her face, I could yet see the things of
which she would be speaking. And at times, as these tales came
floating down to me, I would find them so horrible as to be
forced to cry out, 'Oh, Mamka, Mamka, DON'T! . . .' To this hour
I have no love for the bizarre, and am but a poor hand at
remembering it. And as strange as her stories was my mother.
Eventually she died of an attack of blood-poisoning and, though
but forty, had become grey-headed. Yes, and so terribly did she
smell after her death that everyone in the kitchen was
constrained to exclaim at the odour."

"Yes, but what of the devils?"

"You must wait a minute or two."

Ever as we proceeded, clinging, fantastic branches kept closing
in upon the path, so that we appeared to be walking through a sea
of murmuring verdure. And from time to time a bough would flick
us as though to say: "Speed, speed, or the rain will be upon
you!"

If anything, however, my companion slackened his pace as in
measured, sing-song accents he continued:

"When Jesus Christ, God's Son, went forth into the wilderness to
collect His thoughts, Satan sent devils to subject Him to
temptation. Christ was then young; and as He sat on the burning
sand in the middle of the desert, He pondered upon one thing and
another, and played with a handful of pebbles which He had
collected. Until presently from afar, there descried Him the
devils Hymen, Demon, Igamon, and Zmiulan--devils of equal age with
the Saviour.

"Drawing near unto Him, they said, 'Pray suffer us to sport with
Thee.' Whereupon Christ answered with a smile: 'Pray be seated.'
Then all of them did sit down in a circle, and proceed to
business, which business was to see whether or not any member of
the party could so throw a stone into the air as to prevent it
from falling back upon the burning sand.
..............................  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . .

[In the original Russian this hiatus occurs as given.]


"Christ Himself was the first to throw a stone; whereupon His
stone became changed into a six-winged dove, and fluttered away
towards the Temple of Jerusalem. And, next, the impotent devils
strove to do the same; until at length, when they saw that Christ
could not in any wise be tempted, Zmiulan, the senior of the
devils, cried:

"'0h Lord, we will tempt Thee no more; for of a surety do we
avail not, and, though we be devils, never shall do so!'

"'Aye, never shall ye!' Christ did agree. 'And, therefore, I
will now fulfil that which from the first I did conceive. That ye
be devils I know right well. And that, while yet afar off, ye
did, on beholding me, have compassion upon me I know right well.
While also ye did not in any wise seek to conceal from me the
truth as concerning yourselves. Hence shall ye, for the remainder
of your lives, be GOOD devils; so that at the last shall matters
be rendered easier for you. Do thou, Zmiulan, become King of the
Ocean, and send the winds of the sea to cleanse the land of foul
air. And do thou, Demon, see to it that the cattle shall eat of
no poisonous herb, but that all herbs of the sort be covered with
prickles. Do thou, Igamon, comfort, by night, all comfortless
widows who shall be blaming God for the death of their husbands?
And do thou, Hymen, as the youngest devil of the band, choose for
thyself wherein shall lie thy charge.'

 "'0h Lord,' replied Hymen, 'I do love but to laugh.'

"And the Saviour replied:

"'Then cause thou folk to laugh. Only, mark thou, see to it
that they laugh not IN CHURCH.'

"'Yet even in church would I laugh, 0h Lord,' the devil objected.

" 'Jesus Christ Himself laughed.

" 'God go with you!' at length He said. 'Then let folk laugh even
in church--but QUIETLY.'

"In such wise did Christ convert those four evil devils into
devils of goodness."

Soaring over the green, bushy sea were a number of old oaks. On
them the yellow leaves were trembling as though chilled; here
and there a sturdy hazel was doffing its withered garments, and
elsewhere a wild cherry was quivering, and elsewhere an almost
naked chestnut was politely rendering obeisance to the earth.

"Did you find that story of mine a good one?" my companion
inquired.

"I did, for Christ was so good in it."

"Always and everywhere He is so," Kalinin proudly rejoined. "But
do you also know what an old woman of Smolensk used to sing
concerning Him?"

" I do not."

Halting, my strange traveller chanted in a feignedly senile and
tremulous voice, as he beat time with his foot:

In the heavens a flow'r doth blow,
It is the Son of God.
From it all our joys do flow,
It is the Son of God.
In the sun's red rays He dwells
He, the Son of God.
His light our every ill dispels.
Praised be the Son of God!

Each successive line seemed to inspire Kalinin's voice with added
youthfulness, until, indeed, the concluding words-- "The One and
Only God"-- issued in a high, agreeable tenor.

Suddenly a flash of lightning blazed before us, while dull
thunder crashed among the mountains, and sent its hundred-voiced
echoes rolling over land and sea. In his consternation, Kalinin
opened his mouth until a set of fine, even teeth became bared to
view. Then, with repeated crossings of himself, he muttered.

"0h dread God, 0h beneficent God, 0h God who sittest on high, and
on a golden throne, and under a gilded canopy, do Thou now punish
Satan, lest he overwhelm me in the midst of my sins!"

Whereafter, turning a small and terrified face in my direction,
and blinking his bright eyes, he added with hurried diction:

"Come, brother! Come! Let us run on ahead, for thunderstorms are
my bane. Yes, let us run with all possible speed, run ANYWHERE,
for soon the rain will be pouring down, and these parts are full
of lurking fever."

Off, therefore, we started, with the wind smiting us behind, and
our kettles and teapots jangling, and my wallet, in particular,
thumping me about the middle of the body as though it had been
wielding a large, soft fist. Yet a far cry would it be to the
mountains, nor was any dwelling in sight, while ever and anon
branches caught at our clothes, and stones leapt aloft under our
tread, and the air grew steadily darker, and the mountains seemed
to begin gliding towards us.

Once more from the black cloud-masses, heaven belched a fiery dart
which caused the sea to scintillate with blue sapphires in
response, and, seemingly, to recoil from the shore as the earth
shook, and the mountain defiles emitted a gigantic scrunching
sound of their rock-hewn jaws.

"0h Holy One! 0h Holy One! 0h Holy One!" screamed Kalinin as he
dived into the bushes.

In the rear, the waves lashed us as though they had a mind to
arrest our progress; from the gloom to our front came a sort of
scraping and rasping; long black hands seemed to wave over our
heads; just at the point where the mountain crests lay swathed in
their dense coverlet of cloud ,there rumbled once more the
deafening iron chariot of the thunder-god; more and more
frequently flashed the lightning as the earth rang, and rifts
cleft by the blue glare disclosed, amid the obscurity, great
trees that were rustling and rocking and, to all appearances,
racing headlong before the scourge of a cold, slanting rain.

The occasion was a harassing but bracing one, for as the fine
bands of rain beat upon our faces, our bodies felt filled with a
heady vigour of a kind to fit us to run indefinitely--at all
events to run until this storm of rain and thunder should be
outpaced, and clear weather be reached again.

Suddenly Kalinin shouted: "Stop! Look!"

This was because the fitful illumination of a flash had just
shown up in front of us the trunk of an oak tree which had a
large black hollow let into it like a doorway. So into that
hollow we crawled as two mice might have done--laughing aloud in
our glee as we did so.

"Here there is room for THREE persons," my companion remarked.
"Evidently it is a hollow that has been burnt out--though rascals
indeed must the burners have been to kindle a fire in a living
tree!"

However, the space within the hollow was both confined and
redolent of smoke and dead leaves. Also, heavy drops of rain
still bespattered our heads and shoulders, and at every peal of
thunder the tree quivered and creaked until the strident din
around us gave one the illusion of being afloat in a narrow
caique. Meanwhile at every flash of the lightning's glare, we
could see slanting ribands of rain cutting the air with a network
of blue, glistening, vitreous lines.

Presently, the wind began to whistle less loudly, as though now it
felt satisfied at having driven so much productive rain into the
ground, and washed clean the mountain tops, and loosened the
stony soil.

"U-oh! U-oh!" hooted a grey mountain owl just over our heads.

"Why, surely it believes the time to be night!" Kalinin
commented in a whisper.

"U-oh! U-u-u-oh!" hooted the bird again, and in response my
companion shouted:

"You have made a mistake, my brother!"

By this time the air was feeling chilly, and a bright grey fog
had streamed over us, and wrapped a semi-transparent veil about
the gnarled, barrel-like trunks with their outgrowing shoots and
the few remaining leaves still adhering.

Far and wide the monotonous din continued to rage--it did so until
conscious thought began almost to be impossible. Yet even as one
strained one's attention, and listened to the rain lashing the
fallen leaves, and pounding the stones, and bespattering the
trunks of the trees, and to the murmuring and splashing of
rivulets racing towards the sea, and to the roaring of torrents
as they thundered over the rocks of the mountains, and to the
creaking of trees before the wind, and to the measured thud-thud
of the waves; as one listened to all this, the thousand sounds
seemed to combine into a single heaviness of hurried clamour, and
involuntarily one found oneself striving to disunite them, and to
space them even as one spaces the words of a song.

Kalinin fidgeted, nudged me, and muttered:

"I find this place too close for me. Always I have hated
confinement."

Nevertheless he had taken far more care than I to make himself
comfortable, for he had edged himself right into the hollow, and,
by squatting on his haunches, reduced his frame to the form of a
ball. Moreover, the rain-drippings scarcely or in no wise touched
him, while, in general, he appeared to have developed to the full
an aptitude for vagrancy as a permanent condition, and for the
allowing of no unpleasant circumstance to debar him from
invariably finding the most convenient vantage-ground at a given
juncture. Presently, in fact, he continued:

"Yes; despite the rain and cold and everything else, I consider
life to be not quite intolerable."

"Not quite intolerable in what?"

"Not quite intolerable in the fact that at least I am bound to
the service of no one save God. For if disagreeablenesses have to
be endured, at all events they come better from Him than from
one's own species."

"Then you have no great love for your own species?"

"One loves one's neighbour as the dog loves the stick." To
which, after a pause, the speaker added:

For WHY should I love him?"

It puzzled me to cite a reason off-hand, but, fortunately,
Kalinin did not wait for an answer--rather, he went on to ask:

"Have you ever been a footman?"

"No," I replied.

"Then let me tell you that it is peculiarly difficult for a
footman to love his neighbour."

"Wherefore?"

"Go and be a footman; THEN you will know. In fact, it is never
the case that, if one serves a man, one can love that man. . . .
How steadily the rain persists!"

Indeed, on every hand there was in progress a trickling and a
splashing sound as though the weeping earth were venting soft,
sorrowful sobs over the departure of summer before winter and its
storms should arrive.

"How come you to be travelling the Caucasus?" I asked at
length.

"Merely through the fact that my walking and walking has brought
me hither," was the reply. "For that matter, everyone ends by
heading for the Caucasus."

"Why so?"

"Why NOT, seeing that from one's earliest years one hears of
nothing but the Caucasus, the Caucasus? Why, even our old General
used to harp upon the name, with his moustache bristling, and his
eyes protruding, as he did so. And the same as regards my mother,
who had visited the country in the days when, as yet, the General
was in command but of a company. Yes, everyone tends hither. And
another reason is the fact that the country is an easy one to live
in, a country which enjoys much sunshine, and produces much food,
and has a winter less long and severe than our own winter, and
therefore presents pleasanter conditions of life."

"And what of the country's people?"

"What of the country's people? Oh, so long as you keep yourself
to yourself they will not interfere with you."

"And why will they not?"

Kalinin paused, stared at me, smiled condescendingly, and,
finally, said:

"What a dullard you are to ask about such simple things! Were
you never given any sort of an education? Surely by this time you
ought to be able to understand something?"

Then, with a change of subject, and subduing his tone to one of
snuffling supplication, he added in the sing-song chant of a
person reciting a prayer:

"'0h Lord, suffer me not to become bound unto the clergy the
priesthood, the diaconate, the tchinovstvo, [The official class]
or the intelligentsia!' This was a petition which my mother used
often to repeat."

The raindrops now were falling more gently, and in finer lines
and more transparent network, so that one could once more descry
the great trunks of the blackened oaks, with the green and gold
of their leaves. Also, our own hollow had grown less dark, and
there could be discerned its smoky, satin-bright walls. From
those walls Kalinin picked a bit of charcoal with finger and
thumb, saying:

"It was shepherds that fired the place. See where they dragged
in hay and dead leaves! A shepherd's fife hereabouts must be a
truly glorious one!"

Lastly, clasping his head as though he were about to fall asleep,
he sank his chin between his knees, and relapsed into silence.

Presently a brilliant, sinuous little rivulet which had long been
laving the bare roots of our tree brought floating past us a red
and fawn leaf.

"How pretty," I thought, "that leaf will look from a distance
when reposing on the surface of the sea! For, like the sun when
he is in solitary possession of the heavens, that leaf will stand
out against the blue, silky expanse like a lonely red star."

After awhile my companion began, catlike, to purr to himself a
song. Its melody, the melody of "the moon withdrew behind a
cloud," was familiar enough, but not so the words, which ran:

0h Valentina, wondrous maid,
More comely thou than e'er a flow'r!
The nurse's son doth pine for thee,
And yearn to serve thee every hour!

"What does that ditty mean?" I inquired.

Kalinin straightened himself, gave a wriggle to a form that was
as lithe as a lizard's, and passed one hand over his face.

"It is a certain composition," he replied presently. "It is a
composition that was composed by a military clerk who afterwards
died of consumption. He was my friend his life long, and my only
friend, and a true one, besides being a man out of the common."

"And who was Valentina?"

"My one-time mistress," Kalinin spoke unwillingly.

"And he, the clerk--was he in love with her?"

"Oh dear no!"

Evidently Kalinin had no particular wish to discuss the subject,
for he hugged himself together, buried his face in his hands, and
muttered:

"I should like to kindle a fire, were it not that everything in
the place is too damp for the purpose."

The wind shook the trees, and whistled despondently, while the
fine, persistent rain still whipped the earth.

"I but humble am, and poor,
Nor fated to be otherwise,"

sang Kalinin softly as, flinging up his head with an unexpected
movement, he added meaningly:

"Yes, it is a mournful song, a song which could move to tears.
Only to two persons has it ever been known; to my friend the
clerk and to myself. Yes, and to HER, though I need hardly add
that at once she forgot it."

And Kalinin's eyes flashed into a smile as he added:

"I think that, as a young man, you had better learn forthwith
where the greatest danger lurks in life. Let me tell you a
story."

And upon that a very human tale filtered through the silken
monotonous swish of the downpour, with, for listeners to it, only
the rain and myself.

"Lukianov was NEVER in love with her," he narrated. "Only I was
that. All that Lukianov did in the matter was to write, at my
request, some verses. When she first appeared on the scene (I
mean Valentina Ignatievna) I was just turned nineteen years of
age; and the instant that my eyes fell upon her form I realised
that in her alone lay my fate, and my heart almost stopped
beating, and my vitality stretched out towards her as a speck of
dust flies towards a fire. Yet all this I had to conceal as best
I might; with the result that in the company's presence I felt
like a sentry doing guard duty in the presence of his commanding
officer. But at last, though I strove to pull myself together, to
steady myself against the ferment that was raging in my breast,
something happened. Valentina Ignatievna was then aged about
twenty-five, and very beautiful--marvellous, in fact! Also, she
was an orphan, since her father had been killed by the
Chechentzes, and her mother had died of smallpox at Samarkand. As
regards her kinship with the General, she stood to him in the
relation of niece by marriage. Golden-locked, and as skin-fair as
enamelled porcelain, she had eyes like emeralds, and a figure
wholly symmetrical, though as slim as a wafer. For bedroom she
had a little corner apartment situated next to the kitchen (the
General possessed his own house, of course), while, in addition,
they allotted her a bright little boudoir in which she disposed
her curios and knickknacks, from cut-glass bottles and goblets to
a copper pipe and a glass ring mounted on copper. This ring, when
turned, used to emit showers of glittering sparks, though she was
in no way afraid of them, but would sing as she made them dance:

"Not for me the spring will dawn!
Not for me the Bug will spate!
Not for me love's smile will wait!
Not for me, ah, not for me!

"Constantly would she warble this.

"Also, once she flashed an appeal at me with her eyes, and said:

"'Alexei, please never touch anything in my room, for my things
are too fragile.'

"Sure enough, in HER presence ANYTHING might have fallen from my
hands!

"Meanwhile her song about 'Not for me' used to make me feel
sorry for her. 'Not for you? ' I used to say to myself. 'Ought
not EVERYTHING to be for you? ' And this reflection would cause
my heart to yearn and stretch towards her. Next, I bought a
guitar, an instrument which I could not play, and took it for
instruction to Lukianov, the clerk of the Divisional Staff, which
had its headquarters in our street. In passing I may say that
Lukianov was a little Jewish convert with dark hair, sallow
features, and gimlet-sharp eyes, but beyond all things a fellow
with brains, and one who could play the guitar unforgettably.

"Once he said: 'In life all things are attainable--nothing need
we lose for want of trying. For whence does everything come? From
the plainest of mankind. A man may not be BORN in the rank of a
general, but at least he may attain to that position. Also, the
beginning and ending of all things is woman. All that she
requires for her captivation is poetry. Hence, let me write you
some verses, that you may tender them to her as an offering.'

"These, mind you, were the words of a man in whom the heart was
absolutely single, absolutely dispassionate."

Until then Kalinin had told his story swiftly, with animation;
but thereafter he seemed, as it were, to become extinguished.
After a pause of a few seconds he continued--continued in slower,
to all appearances more unwilling, accents--

"At the time I believed what Lukianov said, but subsequently I
came to see that things were not altogether as he had
represented--that woman is merely a delusion, and poetry merely
fiddle-faddle; and that a man cannot escape his fate, and that,
though good in war, boldness is, in peace affairs, but naked
effrontery. In this, brother, lies the chief, the fundamental law
of life. For the world contains certain people of high station,
and certain people of low; and so long as these two categories
retain their respective positions, all goes well; but as soon as
ever a man seeks to pass from the upper category to the inferior
category, or from the inferior to the upper, the fat falls into
the fire, and that man finds himself stuck midway, stuck neither
here nor there, and bound to abide there for the remainder of his
life, for the remainder of his life. . . . Always keep to your
own position, to the position assigned you by fate.. . . . Will
the rain NEVER cease, think you?"

By this time, as a matter of fact, the raindrops. were falling
less heavily and densely than hitherto, and the wet clouds were
beginning to reveal bright patches in the moisture-soaked
firmament, as evidence that the sun was still in existence.

"Continue," I said.

Kalinin laughed.

"Then you find the story an interesting one," he remarked.

Presently he resumed:

"As I have said, I trusted Lukianov implicitly, and begged of
him to write the verses. And write them he did--he wrote them the
very next day. True, at this distance of time I have forgotten
the words in their entirety, but at least I remember that there
occurred in them a phrase to the effect that 'for days and weeks
have your eyes been consuming my heart in the fire of love, so
pity me, I pray.' I then proceeded to copy out the poem, and
tremblingly to leave it on her table.

"The next morning, when I was tidying her boudoir, she made an
unexpected entry, and, clad in a loose, red dressing-gown, and
holding a cigarette between her lips, said to me with a kindly
smile as she produced my precious paper of verses:

"'Alexei, did YOU write these?'

"'Yes,' was my reply. 'And for Christ's sake pardon me for the
same.'

"'What a pity that such a fancy should have entered your head!
For, you see, I am engaged already--my uncle is intending to marry
me to Doctor Kliachka, and I am powerless in the matter.'

"The very fact that she could address me with so much sympathy
and kindness struck me dumb. As regards Doctor Kliachka, I may
mention that he was a good-looking, blotchy-faced, heavy-jowled
fellow with a moustache that reached to his shoulders, and lips
that were for ever laughing and vociferating. 'Nothing has
either a beginning or an end. The only thing really existent is
pleasure.'

"Nay, even the General could, at times, make sport of the
fellow, and say as he shook with merriment:

"'A doctor-comedian is the sort of man that you are.'

"Now, at the period of which I am speaking I was as straight as
a dart, and had a shock of luxuriant hair over a set of ruddy
features. Also, I was living a life clean in every way, and
maintaining a cautious attitude towards womenfolk, and holding
prostitutes in a contempt born of the fact that I had higher
views with regard to my life's destiny. Lastly, I never indulged
in liquor, for I actually disliked it, and gave way to its
influence only in days subsequent to the episode which I am
narrating. Yes, and, last of all, I was in the habit of taking a
bath every Saturday.

"The same evening Kliachka and the rest of the party went out to
the theatre (for, naturally, the General had horses and a
carriage of his own), and I, for my part, went to inform Lukianov
of what had happened.

"He said: 'I must congratulate you, and am ready to wager you
two bottles of beer that your affair is as good as settled. In a
few seconds a fresh lot of verses shall be turned out, for poetry
constitutes a species of talisman or charm.'

"And, sure enough, he then and there composed the piece about
'the wondrous Valentina.' What a tender thing it is, and how full
of understanding! My God, my God!"

And, with a thoughtful shake of his bead, Kalinin raised his
boyish eyes towards the blue patches in the rain-washed sky.

"Duly she found the verses," he continued after a while, and
with a vehemence that seemed wholly independent of his will. "And
thereupon she summoned me to her room.

"'What are we to do about it all?' she inquired.

"She was but half-dressed, and practically the whole of her
bosom was visible to my sight. Also, her naked feet had on them
only slippers, and as she sat in her chair she kept rocking one
foot to and fro in a maddening way.

"'What are we to do about it all?' she repeated.

"'What am I to say about it, at length I replied, 'save that I
feel as though I were not really existing on earth?'

"'Are you one who can hold your tongue?' was her next question.

"I nodded--nothing else could I compass, for further speech had
become impossible. Whereupon, rising with brows puckered, she
fetched a couple of small phials, and, with the aid of
ingredients thence, mixed a powder which she wrapped in paper,
and handed me with the words:

"'Only one way of escape offers from the Plagues of Egypt. Here
I have a certain powder. Tonight the doctor is to dine with us.
Place the powder in his soup, and within a few days I shall be
free!--yes, free for you!'

"I crossed myself, and duly took from her the paper, whilst a
mist rose, and swam before my eyes, as I did so, and my legs
became perfectly numb. What I next did I hardly know, for
inwardly I was swooning. Indeed, until Kliachka's arrival the
same evening I remained practically in a state of coma."

Here Kalinin shuddered--then glanced at me with drawn features and
chattering teeth, and stirred uneasily.

"Suppose we light a fire?" he ventured. "I am growing shivery
all over. But first we must move outside."

The torn clouds were casting their shadows wearily athwart the
sodden earth and glittering stones and silver-dusted herbage.
Only on a single mountain top had a blur of mist settled like an
arrested avalanche, and was resting there with its edges
steaming. The sea too had grown calmer under the rain, and was
splashing with more gentle mournfulness, even as the blue patches
in the firmament had taken on a softer, warmer look, and stray
sunbeams were touching upon land and sea in turn, and, where they
chanced to fall upon herbage, causing pearls and emeralds to
sparkle on every leaf, and kaleidoscopic tints to glow where the
dark-blue sea reflected their generous radiance. Indeed, so
goodly, so full of promise, was the scene that one might have
supposed autumn to have fled away for ever before the wind and
the rain, and beneficent summer to have been restored.

Presently through the moist, squelching sound of our footsteps,
and the cheerful patter of the rain-drippings, Kalinin's
narrative resumed its languid, querulous course:

"When, that evening, I opened the door to the doctor I could not
bring myself to look him in the face--I could merely hang my head;
whereupon, taking me by the chin, and raising it, he inquired:

"Why is your face so yellow? What is the matter with you?'

"Yes, a kind-hearted man was he, and one who had never failed to
tip me well, and to speak to me with as much consideration as
though I had not been a footman at all.

"'I am not in very good health,' I replied. 'I, I--'

"'Come, come!' was his interjection. 'After dinner I must look
you over, and in the meanwhile, do keep up your spirits.'

"Then I realised that poison him I could not, but that the
powder must be swallowed by myself--yes, by myself! Aye, over my
heart a flash of lightning had gleamed, and shown me that now I
was no longer following the road properly assigned me by fate.

"Rushing away to my room, I poured out a glass of water, and
emptied into it the powder; whereupon the water thickened,
fizzed, and became topped with foam. Oh, a terrible moment it
was! . . . Then I drank the mixture. Yet no burning sensation
ensued, and though I listened to my vitals, nothing was to be
heard in that quarter, but, on the contrary, my head began to
lighten, and I found myself losing the sense of self-pity which
had brought me almost to the point of tears. . . . Shall we
settle ourselves here?"

Before us a large stone, capped with green moss and climbing
plants, was good-humouredly thrusting upwards a broad, flat face
beneath which the body had, like that of the hero Sviatogov,
sunken into the earth through its own weight until only the face,
a visage worn with aeons of meditation, was now visible. On every
side, also, had oak-trees overgrown and encompassed the bulk of
the projection, as though they too had been made of stone, with
their branches drooping sufficiently low to brush the wrinkles of
the ancient monolith. Kalinin seated himself on his haunches
under the overhanging rim of the stone, and said as he snapped
some twigs in half:

"This is where we ought to have been sitting whilst the rain was
coming down."

"And so say I," I rejoined. "But pray continue your story."

"Yes, when you have put a match to the fire."

Whereafter, further withdrawing his spare frame under the stone,
so that he might stretch himself at full length, Kalinin
continued:

"I walked to the pantry quietly enough, though my legs were
tottering beneath me, and I had a cold sensation in my breast.
Suddenly I heard the dining-room echo to a merry peal of
laughter from Valentina Ignatievna, and the General reply to that
outburst:

"'Ah, that man! Ah, these servants of ours! Why, the fellow would
do ANYTHING for a piatak '[A silver five-kopeck piece, equal in
value to 2 1/4 pence.]

"To this my beloved one retorted:

"'Oh, uncle, uncle! Is it only a piatak that I am worth?

And then I heard the doctor put in:

"'What was it you gave him?'

"'Merely some soda and tartaric acid. To think of the fun that we
shall have!'"

Here, closing his eyes, Kalinin remained silent for a moment,
whilst the moist breeze sighed as it drove dense, wet mist
against the black branches of the trees.

"At first my feeling was one of overwhelming joy at the thought
that at least not DEATH was to be my fate. For I may tell you
that, so far from being harmful, soda and tartaric acid are
frequently taken as a remedy against drunken headache. Then the
thought occurred to me: 'But, since I am not a tippler, why
should such a joke have been played upon ME?' However, from that
moment I began to feel easier, and when the company had sat down
to dinner, and, amid a general silence, I was handing round the
soup, the doctor tasted his portion, and, raising his head with a
frown, inquired:

"'Forgive me, but what soup is this? '

"' Ah!' I inwardly reflected. 'Soon, good gentlefolk, you will
see how your jest has miscarried.'

"Aloud I replied--replied with complete boldness:

"'Do not fear, sir. I have taken the powder myself.'

Upon this the General and his wife, who were still in ignorance
that the jest had gone amiss, began to titter, but the others
said nothing, though Valentina Ignatievna's eyes grew rounder and
rounder, until in an undertone she murmured:

"'Did you KNOW that the stuff was harmless?'

"'I did not,' I replied. 'At least, not at the moment of my
drinking it.'

"Whereafter falling headlong to the floor, I lost
consciousness."

Kalinin's small face had become painfully contracted, and grown
old and haggard-looking. Rolling over on to his breast before the
languishing fire, he waved a hand to dissipate the smoke which
was lazily drifting slant-wise.

"For seventeen days did I remain stretched on a sick-bed, and
was attended by the doctor in person. One day, when sitting by my
side, he inquired:

"'I presume your intention was to poison yourself, you foolish
fellow?'

"Yes, merely THAT was what he called me--a 'foolish fellow.' Yet
indeed, what was I to him? Only an entity which might become food
for dogs, for all he cared. Nor did Valentina Ignatievna herself
pay me a single visit, and my eyes never again beheld her. Before
long she and Dr. Kliachka were duly married, and departed to
Kharkov, where he was assigned a post in the Tchuguerski Camp.
Thus only the General remained. Rough and ready, he was,
nevertheless, old and sensible, and for that reason, did not
matter; wherefore I retained my situation as before. On my
recovery, he sent for me, and said in a tone of reproof:

"'Look here. You are not wholly an idiot. What has happened is
that those vile books of yours have corrupted your mind' (as a
matter of fact, I had never read a book in my life, since for
reading I have no love or inclination). 'Hence you must have seen
for yourself that only in tales do clowns marry princesses. You
know, life is like a game of chess. Every piece has its proper
move on the board, or the game could not be played at all.'"

Kalinin rubbed his hands over the fire (slender, non-workmanlike
hands they were), and winked and smiled.

"I took the General's words very seriously, and proceeded to ask
myself: 'To what do those words amount? To this: that though I
may not care actually to take part in the game, I need not waste
my whole existence through a disinclination to learn the best use
to which that existence can be put.'

With a triumphant uplift of tone, Kalinin continued:

"So, brother, I set myself to WATCH the game in question; with
the result that soon I discovered that the majority of men live
surrounded with a host of superfluous commodities which do but
burden them, and have in themselves no real value. What I refer
to is books, pictures, china, and rubbish of the same sort.
Thought I to myself: 'Why should I devote my life to tending and
dusting such commodities while risking, all the time, their
breakage? No more of it for me! Was it for the tending of such
articles that my mother bore me amid the agonies of childbirth?
Is it an existence of THIS kind that must be passed until the
tomb be reached? No, no--a thousand times no! Rather will I, with
your good leave, reject altogether the game of life, and subsist
as may be best for me, and as may happen to be my pleasure.'"

Now, as Kalinin spoke, his eyes emitted green sparks, and as he
waved his hands over the fire, as though to lop off the red
tongues of flame, his fingers twisted convulsively.

"Of course, not all at a stroke did I arrive at this conclusion;
I did so but gradually. The person who finally confirmed me in my
opinion was a friar of Baku, a sage of pre-eminent wisdom,
through his saying to me: 'With nothing at all ought a man to
fetter his soul. Neither with bond-service, nor with property,
nor with womankind, nor with any other concession to the
temptations of this world ought he to constrain its action.
Rather ought he to live alone, and to love none but Christ. Only
this is true. Only this will be for ever lasting.'

"And," added Kalinin with animation and inflated cheeks and
flushed, suppressed enthusiasm, "many lands and many peoples
have I seen, and always have I found (particularly in Russia)
that many folk already have reached an understanding of
themselves, and, consequently, refused any longer to render
obeisance to absurdities. 'Shun evil, and you will evolve good.'
That is what the friar said to me as a parting word--though long
before our encounter had I grasped the meaning of the axiom. And
that axiom I myself have since passed on to other folk, as I hope
to do yet many times in the future."

At this point the speaker's tone reverted to one of querulous
anxiety.

"Look how low the sun has sunk!" he exclaimed.

True enough, that luminary, large and round, was declining into--
rather, towards--the sea, while suspended between him and the
water were low, dark, white-topped cumuli.

"Soon nightfall will be overtaking us," continued Kalinin as he
fumbled in his kaftan. "And in these parts jackals howl when
darkness is come."

In particular did I notice three clouds that looked like Turks in
white turbans and robes of a dusky red colour. And as these cloud
Turks bent their heads together in private converse, suddenly
there swelled up on the back of one of the figures a hump, while
on the turban of a second there sprouted forth a pale pink
feather which, becoming detached from its base, went floating
upwards towards the zenith and the now rayless, despondent,
moonlike sun. Lastly the third Turk stooped forward over the sea
to screen his companions, and as he did so, developed a huge red
nose which comically seemed to dip towards, and sniff at, the
waters.

"Sometimes," continued Kalinin's even voice through the
crackling and hissing of the wood fire, "a man who is old and
blind may cobble a shoe better than cleverer men than he, can
order their whole lives."

But no longer did I desire to listen to Kalinin, for the threads
which had drawn me, bound me, to his personality had now parted.
All that I desired to do was to contemplate in silence the sea,
while thinking of some of those subjects which at eventide never
fail to stir the soul to gentle, kindly emotion. Bombers,
Kalinin's words continued dripping into my ear like belated
raindrops.

"Nowadays everybody is a busybody. Nowadays everyone inquires of
his fellow-man, 'How is your life ordered?' To which always
there is added didactically, 'But you ought not to live as you
are doing. Let me show you the way.' As though anyone can tell me
how best my life may attain full development, seeing that no one
can possibly have such a matter within his knowledge! Nay, let
every man live as best he pleases, without compulsion. For
instance, I have no need of you. In return, it is not your
business either to require or to expect aught of me. And this I
say though Father Vitali says the contrary, and avers that
throughout should man war with the evils of the world."

In the vague, wide firmament a blood-red cluster of clouds was
hanging, and as I contemplated it there occurred to me the
thought, "May not those clouds be erstwhile righteous world-folk
who are following an unseen path across that expanse, and dyeing
it red with their good blood as they go, in order that the earth
may be fertilised?"

To right and left of that strip of living flame the sea was of a
curious wine tint, while further off, rather, it was as soft and
black as velvet, and in the remote east sheet-lightning was
flashing even as though some giant hand were fruitlessly
endeavouring to strike a match against the sodden firmament.

Meanwhile Kalinin continued to discourse with enthusiasm on the
subject of Father Vitali, the Labour Superintendent of the
monastery of New Athos, while describing in detail the monk's
jovial, clever features with their pearly teeth and contrasting
black and silver beard. In particular he related how
once Vitali had knitted his fine, almost womanlike eyes, and said
in a bass which stressed its "o's":

"On our first arrival here, we found in possession only
prehistoric chaos and demoniacal influence. Everywhere had
clinging weeds grown to rankness; everywhere one found one's feet
entangled among bindweed and other vegetation of the sort. And
now see what beauty and joy and comfort the hand of man has
wrought!"

And, having thus spoken, the monk had traced a great circle with
his eye and doughty hand, a circle which had embraced as in a
frame the mount, and the gardens fashioned and developed by
ridgings of the rock, and the downy soil which had been beaten
into those ridgings, and the silver streak of waterfall playing
almost at Vitali's feet, and the stone-hewn staircase leading to
the cave of Simeon the Canaanite, and the gilded cupolas of the
new church where they had stood flashing in the noontide sun, and
the snow-white, shimmering blocks of the guesthouse and the
servants' quarters, and the glittering fishponds, and the trees
of uniform trimness, yet a uniformly regal dignity.

"Brethren," the monk had said in triumphant conclusion,
"wheresoever man may be, he will, as he so desires, be given power
to overcome the desolation of the wilds."

"And then I pressed him further," Kalinin added. " Yes, I said
to him: 'Nevertheless Christ, our Lord, was not like you, for He
was homeless and a wanderer. He was one who utterly rejected your
life of intensive cultivation of the soil'" (as he related the
incident Kalinin gave his head sundry jerks from side to side
which made his ears flap, to and fro). "'Also neither for the
lowly alone nor for the exalted alone did Christ exist. Rather,
He, like all great benefactors, was one who had no particular
leaning. Nay, even when He was roaming the Russian Land in
company with Saints Yuri and Nikolai, He always forbore to
intrude Himself into the villages' affairs, just as, whenever His
companions engaged in disputes concerning mankind, He never
failed to maintain silence on the subject.' Yes, thus I plagued
Vitali until he shouted at my head, 'Ah, impudence, you are a
heretic!'"

By this time, the air under the lee of the stone was growing smoky
and oppressive, for the fire, with its flames looking like a
bouquet compounded of red poppies or azaleas and blooms of an
aureate tint, had begun fairly to live its beautiful existence,
and was blazing, and diffusing warmth, and laughing its bright,
cheerful, intelligent laugh. Yet from the mountains and the
cloud-masses evening was descending, as the earth emitted
profound gasps of humidity, and the sea intoned its vague,
thoughtful, resonant song.

"I presume we are going to pass the night here?" Kalinin at
length queried.

"No, for my intention is, rather, to continue my journey."

"Then let us make an immediate start."

"But my direction will not be the same as yours, I think?"

Previously to this, Kalinin had squatted down upon his haunches,
and taken some bread and a few pears from his wallet; but now, on
hearing my decision, he replaced the viands in his receptacle,
snapped--to the lid of it with an air of vexation-- and asked:

"Why did you come with me at all?"

"Because I wanted to have a talk with you--I had found you an
interesting character."

"Yes. At least I am THAT; many like me do not exist."

"Pardon me; I have met several."

"Perhaps you have." After which utterance, doubtfully drawled,
the speaker added more sticks to the fire.

Eventide was falling with tardy languor, but, as yet, the sun,
though become a gigantic, dull, red lentil in appearance, was not
hidden, and the waves were still powerless to besprinkle his
downward road of fire. Presently, however, he subsided into a
cloud bank; whereupon darkness flooded the earth like water
poured from an empty basin, and the great kindly stars shone
forth, and the nocturnal profundity, enveloping the world, seemed
to soften it even as a human heart may be rendered gentle.

"Good-bye!" I said as I pressed my companion's small, yielding
hand: whereupon he looked me in the eyes in his open, boyish way,
and replied:

"I wish I were going with you!"

"Well, come with me as far as Gudaout."

"Yes, I will."

So we set forth once more to traverse the land which I, so alien
to its inhabitants, yet so at one with all that it contained,
loved so dearly, and of which I yearned to fertilise the life in
return for the vitality with which it had filled my own
existence.

For daily, the threads with which my heart was bound to the world
at large were growing more numerous; daily my heart was storing
up something which had at its root a sense of love for life, of
interest in my fellow-man.

And that evening,as we proceeded on our way, the sea was
singing its vespertinal hymn, the rocks were rumbling as the
water caressed them, and on the furthermost edge of the dark void
there were floating dim white patches where the sunset's glow had
not yet faded-- though already stars were glowing in the zenith.
Meanwhile every slumbering treetop was aquiver, and as I
stepped across the scattered rain-pools, their water gurgled
dreamily, timidly under my feet.

Yes, that night I was a torch unto myself, for in my breast a red
flame was smouldering like a living beacon, and leading me to
long that some frightened, belated wayfarer should, as it were,
sight my little speck of radiancy amid the darkness.



THE DEAD MAN

One evening I was sauntering along a soft, grey, dusty track
between two breast-high walls of grain. So narrow was the track
that here and there tar-besmeared cars were lying--tangled,
broken, and crushed--in the ruts of the cartway.

Field mice squeaked as a heavy car first swayed--then bent
forwards towards the sun-baked earth. A number of martins and
swallows were flitting in the sky, and constituting a sign of the
immediate proximity of dwellings and a river; though for the
moment, as my eyes roved over the sea of gold, they encountered
naught beyond a belfry rising to heaven like a ship's mast, and
some trees which from afar looked like the dark sails of a ship.
Yes, there was nothing else to be seen save the brocaded,
undulating steppe where gently it sloped away south-westwards.
And as was the earth's outward appearance, so was that of the
sky--equally peaceful.

Invariably, the steppe makes one feel like a fly on a platter.
Invariably, it inclines one to believe, when the centre of the
expanse is reached, that the earth lies within the compass of the
sky, with the sun embracing it, and the stars hemming it about
as, half-blinded, they stare at the sun's beauty.

********************************

Presently the sun's huge, rosy-red disk impinged upon the blue
shadows of the horizon before preparing to sink into a snow-white
cloud-bank; and as it did so it bathed the ears of grain around
me in radiance and caused the cornflowers to seem the darker by
comparison; and the stillness, the herald of night, to accentuate
more than ever the burden of the earth's song.

Fanwise then spread the ruddy beams over the firmament; and, in
so doing, they cast upon my breast a shaft of light like Moses'
rod, and awoke therein a flood of calm, but ardent, sentiments
which set me longing to embrace all the evening world, and to
pour into its ear great, eloquent, and never previously voiced,
utterances.

Now, too, the firmament began to spangle itself with stars; and
since the earth is equally a star, and is peopled with humankind,
I found myself longing to traverse every road throughout the
universe, and to behold, dispassionately, all the joys and
sorrows of life, and to join my fellows in drinking honey mixed
with gall.

Yet also there was upon me a feeling of hunger, for not since the
morning had my wallet contained a morsel of food. Which
circumstance hindered the process of thought, and intermittently
vexed me with the reflection that, rich though is the earth, and
much thence though humanity has won by labour, a man may yet be
forced to walk hungry. . . .

Suddenly the track swerved to the right, and as the walls of
grain opened out before me, there lay revealed a steppe valley,
with, flowing at its bottom, a blue rivulet, and spanning the
rivulet, a newly-constructed bridge which, with its reflection in
the water, looked as yellow as though fashioned of rope. On the
further side of the rivulet some seven white huts lay pressed
against a small declivity that was crowned with a cattle-fold,
and amid the silver-grey trunks of some tall black poplars whose
shadows, where they fell upon the hamlet, seemed as soft as down
a knee-haltered horse, was stumping with swishing tail. And though
the air, redolent of smoke and tar and hemp ensilage, was filled
with the sounds of poultry cackling and a baby crying during
the process of being put to bed, the hubbub in no way served to
dispel the illusion that everything in the valley was but part of
a sketch executed by an artistic hand, and cast in soft tints
which the sun had since caused, in some measure, to fade.

In the centre of the semi-circle of huts there stood a brick-
kiln, and next to it, a high, narrow red chapel which resembled a
one-eyed watchman. And as I stood gazing at the scene in general,
a crane stooped with a faint and raucous cry, and a woman who had
come out to draw water looked as though, as she raised bare arms
to stretch herself upwards-- cloud-like, and white-robed from
head to foot-- she were about to float away altogether.

Also, near the brick-kiln there lay a patch of black mud in the
glistening, crumpled-velvet blue substance of which two urchins
of five and three were, breechless, and naked from the waist
upwards, kneading yellow feet amid a silence as absorbed as
though their one desire in life had been to impregnate the mud
with the red radiance of the sun. And so much did this laudable
task interest me, and engage my sympathy and attention, that I
stopped to watch the strapping youngsters, seeing that even in
mire the sun has a rightful place, for the reason that the deeper
the sunlight's penetration of the soil, the better does that soil
become, and the greater the benefit to the people dwelling on its
surface.

Viewed from above, the scene lay, as it were, in the palm of
one's hand. True, by no manner of means could such lowly farm
cots provide me with a job, but at least should I, for that
evening, be able to enjoy the luxury of a chat with the cots'
kindly inhabitants. Hence, with, in my mind, a base and
mischievous inclination to retail to those inhabitants tales of
the marvellous kind of which I knew them to stand wellnigh as
much in need as of bread, I resumed my way, and approached the
bridge.

As I did so, there arose from the ground-level an animated clod of
earth in the shape of a sturdy individual. Unwashed and unshaven,
he had hanging on his frame an open canvas shirt, grey with dust,
and baggy blue breeches.

"Good evening," I said to the fellow.

"I wish you the same," he replied. "Whither are you bound?"

"First of all, what is the name of this river?"

"What is its name? Why, it is the Sagaidak, of course."

On the man's large, round head there was a shock of bristling,
grizzled curls, while pendent to the moustache below it were ends
like those of the moustache of a Chinaman. Also, as his small
eyes scanned me with an air of impudent distrust, I could detect
that they were engaged in counting the holes and dams in my
raiment. Only after a long interval did he draw a deep breath as
from his pocket he produced a clay pipe with a cane mouthpiece,
and, knitting his brows attentively, fell to peering into the
pipe's black bowl. Then he said:

"Have you matches?"

I replied in the affirmative.

"And some tobacco?"

For awhile he continued to contemplate the sun where that
luminary hung suspended above a cloud-bank before finally
declining. Then he remarked:

"Give me a pinch of the tobacco. As for matches, I have some."

So both of us lit up; after which he rested his elbows upon the
balustrade of the bridge, leant back against the central
stanchions, and for some time continued merely to emit and inhale
blue coils of smoke. Then his nose wrinkled, and he expectorated.

"Muscovite tobacco is it?" he inquired.

"No--Roman, Italian."

"Oh!" And as the wrinkles of his nose straightened themselves
again he added: "Then of course it is good tobacco."

To enter a dwelling in advance of one's host is a breach of
decorum; wherefore, I found myself forced to remain standing where
I was until my interlocutor's tale of questions as to my precise
identity, my exact place of origin, my true destination, and my
real reasons for travelling should tardily win its way to a
finish. Greatly the process vexed me, for I was eager, rather, to
learn what the steppe settlement might have in store for my
delectation.

"Work?" the fellow drawled through his teeth. "Oh no, there is
no work to be got here. How could there be at this season of the
year?"

Turning aside, he spat into the rivulet.

On the further bank of the latter, a goose was strutting
importantly at the head of a string of round, fluffy, yellow
goslings, whilst driving the brood were two little girls--the one
a child but little larger than the goose itself, dressed in a red
frock, and armed with a switch; and the other one a youngster
absolutely of a size with the bird, pale of feature, plump of
body, bowed of leg, and grave of expression.

"Ufim!" came at this moment in the strident voice of a woman
unseen, but incensed; upon which my companion bestowed upon me a
sidelong nod, and muttered with an air of appreciation:

"THERE'S lungs for you!"

Whereafter, he fell to twitching the toes of a chafed and
blackened foot, and to gazing at their nails. His next question
was:

"Are you, maybe, a scholar?"

"Why do you ask?"

"Because, if you are, you might like to read the Book over a
corpse."

And so proud, apparently, was he of the proposal that a faint
smile crossed his flaccid countenance.

"You see, it would be work," he added with his brown eyes
veiled, "whilst, in addition, you would be paid ten kopecks for
your trouble, and allowed to keep the shroud."

"And should also be given some supper, I suppose?"

"Yes--and should also be given some supper."

"Where is the corpse lying?"

"In my own hut. Shall we go there?"

Off we set. En route we heard once more a strident shout of:

"Ufi-i-im!"

As we proceeded, shadows of trees glided along the soft road to
meet us, while behind a clump of bushes on the further bank of
the rivulet some children were shouting at their play. Thus, what
with the children's voices, and the purling of the water, and the
noise of someone planing a piece of wood, the air seemed full of
tremulous, suspended sound. Meanwhile, my host said to me with a
drawl:

"Once we did have a reader here. An old woman she was, a regular
old witch who at last had to be removed to the town for
amputation of the feet. They might well have cut off her tongue
too whilst they were about it, since, though useful enough, she
could rail indeed!"

Presently a black puppy, a creature of about the size of a toad,
came ambling, three-legged fashion, under our feet. Upon that it
stiffened its tail, growled, and snuffed the air with its tiny
pink nose.

Next there popped up from somewhere or another a barefooted young
woman. Clapping her hands, she bawled:

"Here, you Ufim, how I have been calling for you, and calling
for you!"

"Eh? Well, I never heard you."

"Where were you, then?"

By way of reply, my conductor silently pointed in my direction
with the stem of his pipe. Then he led me into the forecourt of
the hut next to the one whence the young woman had issued, whilst
she proceeded to project fresh volleys of abuse, and fresh
expressions of accentuated non-amiability.

In the little doorway of the dwelling next to hers, we found
seated two old women. One of them was as rotund and dishevelled
as a battered, leathern ball, and the other one was a woman bony
and crooked of back, swarthy of skin, and irritable of feature.
At the women's feet lay, lolling out a rag-like tongue, a shaggy
dog which, red and pathetic of eye, could boast of a frame nearly
as large as a sheep's.

First of all, Ufim related in detail how he had fallen in with
myself. Then he stated the purpose for which he conceived it
was possible that I might prove useful. And all the time that he
was speaking, two pairs of eyes contemplated him in silence;
until, on the completion of his recital, one of the old women
gave a jerk to a thin, dark neck, and the other old dame invited
me to take a seat whilst she prepared some supper.

Amid the tangled herbage of the forecourt, a spot overgrown with
mallow and bramble shoots, there was standing a cart which,
lacking wheels, had its axle-points dark with mildew. Presently a
herd of cattle was driven past the hut, and over the hamlet there
seemed to arise, drift, and float, a perfect wave of sound.
Also, as evening descended, I could see an ever-increasing number
of grey shadows come creeping forth from the forecourt's
recesses, and overlaying and darkening the turf.

"One day all of us must die," remarked Ufim, with empressement
as he tapped the bowl of his pipe against a wall.

The next moment the barefooted, red-cheeked young woman showed
herself at the gate, and asked in tones rather less vehement than
recently:

"Are you coming, or are you not?"

"Presently," replied Ufim. "One thing at a time."

For supper I was given a hunch of bread and a bowl of milk;
whereupon the dog rose, laid its aged, slobbering muzzle upon my
knee, and gazed into my face with its dim eyes as though it were
saying, "May I too have a bite?"

Next, like an eventide breeze among withered herbage, there
floated across the forecourt the hoarse voice of the crook-backed
old woman.

"Let us pray," she said. "Oh God, take away from us all sorrow,
and receive therefore requitement in twofold measure!"

As she recited the prayer with a mien as dark as fate, the
supplicant rolled her long neck from side to side, and nodded her
ophidian-shaped head in accordance with a sort of regular,
lethargic rhythm. Next I heard sink to earth, at my feet, some
senile words uttered in a sort of singsong.

"Some folk need work just as much as they wish, and others need
do no work at all. Yet OUR folk have to work beyond their
strength, and to work without any recompense for the toil which
they undergo."

Upon this the smaller of the old crones whispered:

"But the Mother of God will recompense them. She recompenses
everyone."

Then a dead silence fell--a weighty silence, a silence seemingly
fraught with matters of import, and inspiring in one an assurance
that presently there would be brought forth impressive
reflections-- there would reach the ear words of mark.

"I may tell you," at length the crook-backed old woman remarked
as she attempted to straighten herself, "that though my husband
was not without enemies, he also had a particular friend named
Andrei, and that when failing strength was beginning to make life
difficult for us in our old home on the Don, and folk took to
reviling and girding at my husband, Andrei came to us one day,
and said: 'Yakov, let not your hands fail you, for the earth is
large, and in all parts has been given to men for their use. If
folk be cruel, they are so through stupidity and prejudice, and
must not be judged for being so. Live your own life. Let theirs
be theirs, and yours yours, so that, dwelling in peace, while
yielding to none, you shall in time overcome them all.'"

"That is what Vasil too used to say. He used to say: 'Let theirs
be theirs, and ours ours.'"

"Aye, never a good word dies, but, wheresoever it be uttered,
flies thence through the world like a swallow."

Ufim corroborated this with a nod.

"True indeed!" he remarked. "Though also it has been said that
a good word is Christ's, and a bad word the priest's."

One of the old women shook her head vigorously at this, and
croaked:

"The badness lies not in any word of a priest, but in what you
yourself have just said. You are greyheaded, Ufim, yet often you
speak without thought."

Presently Ufim's wife reappeared, and, waving her hands as though
she were brandishing a sieve, began to vent renewed volleys of
virulent abuse.

"My God," she cried, "what sort of a man is that? Why, a man
who neither speaks nor listens, but for ever keeps baying at the
moon like a dog!"

"NOW she's started!" Ufim drawled.

Westward there were arising, and soaring skyward, clouds of such
a similarity to blue smoke and blood-red flame that the steppe
seemed almost to be in danger of catching fire thence. Meanwhile
a soft evening breeze was caressing the expanse as a whole, and
causing the grain to bend drowsily earthward as golden-red
ripples skimmed its surface. Only in the eastern quarter whence
night's black, sultry shadow was stealthily creeping in our
direction had darkness yet descended.

At intervals there came vented from the window above my head the
hot odour of a dead body; and, whenever that happened, the dog's
grey nostrils and muzzle would quiver, and its eyes would blink
pitifully as it gazed aloft. Glancing at the heavens, Ufim
remarked with conviction:

"There will be no rain tonight."

"Do you keep such a thing as a Psalter here?" I inquired.

"Such a thing as a what?"

"As a Psalter-- a book?"

No answer followed.

Faster and faster the southern night went on descending, and
wiping the land clean of heat, as though that heat had been dust.
Upon me there came a feeling that I should like to go and bury
myself in some sweet-smelling hay, and sleep there until sunrise.

"Maybe Panek has one of those things?" hazarded Ufim after a
long pause. "At any rate he has dealings with the Molokans."

After that, the company held further converse in whispers. Then
all save the more rotund of the old women left the forecourt,
while its remaining occupant said to me with a sigh:

"You may come and look at him if you wish."

Small and gentle looked the woman's meekly lowered head as,
folding her hands across her breast, she added in a whisper:

"Oh purest Mother of God! Oh Thou of spotless chastity!"

In contrast to her expression, that on the face of the dead man
was stem and, as it were, fraught with importance where thick
grey eyebrows lay parted over a large nose, and the latter curved
downwards towards a moustache which divided introspective,
partially closed eyes from a mouth that was set half-open.
Indeed, it was as though the man were pondering something of
annoyance, so that presently he would make shift to deliver
himself of a final and urgent injunction. The blue smoke of a
meagre candle quivered meanwhile, over his head, though the wick
diffused so feeble a light that the death blurs under the eyes
and in the cheek furrows lay uneffaced, and the dark hands and
wrists, disposed, lumplike, on the front of the greyish-blue
shroud, seemed to have had their fingers twisted in a manner
which even death had failed to rectify. And ever and anon,
streaming from door to window, came a draught variously fraught
with the odours of wormwood, mint, and corruption.

Presently the old woman's whispering grew more animated and
intelligible, while constantly, amid the wheezed mutterings,
sheet lightning cut the black square of the window space with
menacing flashes, and seemed, with their blue glare, as it shot
through the tomblike hut, to cause the candle's flickering flame
to undergo a temporary extinction, a temporary withdrawal, and
the grey bristles on the dead man's face to gleam like the scales
of a fish, and his features to gather themselves into a grim
frown. Meanwhile, like a stream of cold, bitter water dripping
upon my breast, the old woman's whispered soliloquy maintained
its uninterrupted flow.

At length there recurred, somehow, to my mind the words which,
impressive though they be, never can assuage sorrow--the words:

"Weep not for me, Martha, nor gaze into the tomb, for, lo, I am
risen!"

Nay, and never would THIS man rise again. . . .

Presently the bony old woman returned with a report that nowhere
among the huts could a Psalter be found, but only a book of
another kind. Would it do?

The other book turned out to be a grammar of the Church Slavonic
dialect, with the first pages torn out, and beginning with the
words, "Drug, drugi, druzhe." ["A friend, of a friend, O
friend."]

"What, then, are we to do? " vexedly asked the smaller of the
dames when I had explained to her that a grammar could work no
benefit to a corpse. As she put the query, her small, childlike
face quivered with disappointment, and her eyes swelled and
overflowed with tears.

"My man has lived his life," she said with a sob, "and now he
cannot even be given proper burial! "

And, similarly, when next I offered to recite over her husband
each and every prayer and psalm that I could contrive to recall
to my recollection, on condition that all present should
meanwhile leave the hut (for I felt that, since the task would be
one novel to me, the attendance of auditors might hinder me from
mustering my entire stock of petitions), she so disbelieved me,
or failed to understand me, that for long enough she could only
stand tottering in the doorway as, with twitching nose, she drew
her sleeve across her worn, diminutive features.

Nevertheless she did, at last, take her departure.

*******************************

Low over the steppe, stray flashes of summer lightning still
gleamed against the jet black sky as they flooded the hut with
their lurid shimmer; and each time that the darkness of the
sultry night swept back into the room, the candle flickered, and
the corpse's prone figure seemed to open its half-closed eyes
and glance at the shadows which palpitated on its breast, and
danced over the white walls and ceiling.

Similarly did I glance from time to time at HIM, yet glance with
a guarded eye, and with a feeling in me that when a corpse is
present anything may happen; until finally I rallied conscience
to my aid, and recited under my breath:

"Pardon Thou all who have sinned, whether they be men, or
whether they, being not men, do yet stand higher than the beasts
of the field."

However, the only result of the recitation was to bring to my
mind a thought directly at variance with the import of the words,
the thought that "it is not sin that is hard and bitter to
ensue, but righteousness."

"Sins wilful and of ignorance," I continued. "Sins known and
unknown. Sins committed through imprudence and evil example. Sins
committed through forwardness and sloth."

"Though to YOU, brother," mentally I added to the corpse, "none
of this, of course, applies."

Again, glancing at the blue stars, where they hung glittering in
the fathomless obscurity of the sky, I reflected:

"Who in this house is looking at them save myself?"

Presently, with a pattering of claws over the beaten clay of the
floor, there entered the dog. Once or twice it paced the length
of the room. Then, with a sniff at my legs, and a grumble to
itself, it departed as it had come. Perhaps the creature felt too
old to bay a dirge to its master after the manner of its kind. In
any case, as it vanished through the doorway, the shadows- -so I
fancied--sought to slip out after it, and, floating in that
direction, fanned my face with a breath as of ice, while the
flame of the candle flickered the more-- as though it too were
seeking to wrest itself from the candlestick, and go floating
upwards to join the band of stars-- a band of luminaries which it
might well have deemed to be of a brilliance as small and as
pitiful as its own. And I, for my part, since I had no wish to
see what light there was disappear, followed the struggles of the
tiny flame with a tense anxiety which made my eyes ache.
Oppressed and uneasy all over as I stood by the dead man's
shoulder, I strained my ears and listened, listened ever, to the
silence encompassing the hut.

Eventually, drowsiness began to steal over me, and proved a
feeling hard to resist. Yet still with an effort did I contrive
to recall the beautiful prayers of Saints Makari Veliki,
Chrysostom, and Damarkin, while at the same time something
resembling a swarm of mosquitos started to hum in my head, the
words wherein the Sixth Precept issues its injunction to: " all
persons about to withdraw to a couch of rest."

And next, to escape falling asleep, I fell to reciting the kondak
[Hymn for the end of the day] which begins:

"Oh Lord, refresh my soul thus grievously made feeble with wrong
doing."

Still engaged in this manner, suddenly I heard something rustle
outside the door. Then a dry whisper articulated:

"Oh God of Mercy, receive unto Thyself also my soul!"

Upon that, the fancy occurred to me that probably the old woman's
soul was as grey and timid as a linnet, and that when it should
fly up to the throne of the Mother of God, and the Mother should
extend to that little soul her tender, white, and gracious hand,
the newcomer would tremble all over, and flutter her gentle wings
until well nigh death should supervene.

And then the Mother of God would say to Her Son:

"Son, pray see the fearfulness of Thy people on earth, and their
estrangement from joy! Oh Son, is that well?"

And He would make answer to Her--

He would make answer to Her, and say I know not what.

*********************************

And suddenly, so I fancied, a voice answered mine out of the
brooding hush, as though it too were reciting a prayer. Yet so
complete, so profound, was the stillness, that the voice seemed
far away, submerged, unreal--a mere phantom of an echo, of the
echo of my own voice. Until, on my desisting from my recital, and
straining my cars yet more, the sound seemed to approach and grow
clearer as shuffling footsteps also advanced in my direction, and
there came a mutter of:

"Nay, it CANNOT be so!"

"Why is it that the dogs have failed to bark?" I reflected,
rubbing my eyes, and fancying as I did so that the dead man's
eyebrows twitched, and his moustache stirred in a grim smile.

Presently a deep, hoarse, rasping voice vociferated in the
forecourt:

"What do you say, old woman? Yes, that he must die-- I knew all
along,--so you can cease your chattering? Men like him keep up to
the last, then lay them down to rise to more... WHO is with him? A
stranger? A-ah!"

And, the next moment, a bulk so large and shapeless that it might
well have been the darkness of the night embodied, stumbled
against the outer side of the door, grunted, hiccuped, and
lurching head foremost into the hut, grew wellnigh to the
ceiling. Then it waved a gigantic hand, crossed itself in the
direction of the candle, and, bending forward until its forehead
almost touched the feet of the corpse, queried under its breath:

"How now, Vasil?"

Thereafter, the figure vented a sob whilst a strong smell of
vodka arose in the room, and from the doorway the old woman said
in an appealing voice:

"Pray give HIM the book, Father Demid."

"No indeed! Why should I? I intend to do the reading myself."

And a heavy hand laid itself upon my shoulder, while a great
hairy face bent over mine, and inquired:

"A young man, are you not? A member of the clergy, too, I
suppose?"

So covered with tufts of auburn hair was the enormous head above
me--tufts the sheen of which even the semi-obscurity of the pale
candlelight failed to render inconspicuous--that the mass, as a
whole, resembled a mop. And as its owner lurched to and fro, he
made me lurch responsively by now drawing me towards himself, now
thrusting me away. Meanwhile he continued to suffuse my face with
the hot, thick odour of spirituous liquor.

"Father Demid!" again essayed the old woman with an imploring
wail, but he cut her short with the menacing admonition:

"How often have I told you that you must not address a deacon as
'Father'? Go to bed! Yes, be off with you, and let me mind my
affairs myself! GO, I say! But first light me another candle, for
I cannot see a single thing in front of me."

With which, throwing himself upon a bench, the deacon slapped his
knee with a book which he had in his hands, and put to me the
query:

"Should you care to have a dram of gorielka? [Another name for
vodka.]

"No," I replied. "At all events, not here."

"Indeed?" the deacon cried, unabashed. "But come, a bottle of
the stuff is here, in my very pocket."

"This is no place in which to be drinking."

For a moment the deacon said nothing. Then he muttered:

"True, true. So let us adjourn to the forecourt. . . . Yes, what
you say is no more than the truth."

"Had you not better remain seated where you are, and begin the
reading? "

"No, I am going to do no such thing. YOU shall do the reading.
Tonight I, I--well I am not very well, for I have been drinking a
little."

And, thrusting the book into my stomach, he sank his head upon
his breast, and fell to swaying it ponderously up and down.

"Folk die," was his next utterance, "and the world remains as
full of grief as ever. Yes, folk die even before they have seen a
little good accrue to themselves."

"I see that your book is not a Psalter," here I interposed after
an inspection of the volume.

"You are wrong."

"Then look for yourself."

He grabbed the book by its cover, and, by dint of holding the
candle close to its pages, discovered, eventually, that matters
were as I had stated.

This took him aback completely.

"What can the fact mean?" he exclaimed. "Oh, I know what has
happened. The mistake has come of my being in such a hurry. The
other book, the true Psalter, is a fat, heavy volume, whereas
this one is--"

For a moment he seemed sobered by the shock. At all events, he
rose and, approaching the corpse, said, as he bent over the bed
with his beard held back:

"Pardon me, Vasil, but what is to be done?"

Then he straightened himself again, threw back his curls, and,
drawing a bottle from his pocket, and thrusting the neck of the
bottle into his mouth, took a long draught, with a whistling of
his nostrils as he did so.

"Well?" I said.

"Well, I intend to go to bed--my idea is to drink and enjoy
myself awhile."

"Go, then."

"And what of the reading?"

"Who would wish you to mumble words which you would not be
comprehending as you uttered them?"

The deacon reseated himself upon the bench, leaned forward,
buried his face in his hands and remained silent.

Fast the July night was waning. Fast its shadows were dissolving
into corners, and allowing a whiff of fresh dewy morningtide to
enter at the window. Already was the combined light of the two
candles growing paler, with their flames looking like the eyes of
a frightened child.

"You have lived your life, Vasi," at length the deacon
muttered, "and though once I had a place to which to resort, now
I shall have none. Yes, my last friend is dead. Oh Lord-- where is
Thy justice?"

For myself, I went and took a seat by the window, and, thrusting
my head into the open air, lit a pipe, and continued to listen
with a shiver to the deacon's wailings.

"Folk used to gird at my wife," he went on, "and now they are
gnawing at me as pigs might gnaw at a cabbage. That is so, Vasil.
Yes that is so."

Again the bottle made its appearance. Again the deacon took a
draught. Again he wiped his beard. Then he bent over the dead man
once more, and kissed the corpse's forehead.

"Good-bye, friend of mine!" he said. Then to myself he added
with unlooked-for clarity and vigour:

"My friend here was but a plain man--a man as inconspicuous among
his fellows as a rook among a flock of rooks. Yet no rook was he.
Rather, he was a snow-white dove, though none but I realised the
fact. And now he has been withdrawn from the 'grievous bondage of
Pharaoh.' Only I am left. Verily, after my passing, shall my soul
torment and vomit spittle upon his adversaries!"

"Have you known much sorrow?"

The deacon did not reply at once. When he did so he said dully:

"All of us have known much sorrow. In some cases we have known
more than was rightfully our due. I certainly, have known much.
But go to sleep, for only in sleep do we recover what is ours."

And he added as he tripped over his own feet, and lurched heavily
against me:

"I have a longing to sing something. Yet I feel that I had best
not, for song at such an hour awakens folk, and starts them
bawling . . . But beyond all things would I gladly sing."

With which he buzzed into my ear:

"To whom shall I sing of my grief?
To whom resort for relief?
To the One in whose ha-a-and--"

At this point the sharp bristles of his beard so tickled my neck
as to cause me to edge further away.

"You do not like me?" he queried. "Then go to sleep, and to
the devil too!"

"It was your beard that was tickling me."

"Indeed? Ought I to have shaved for your benefit before I came?"

He reflected awhile--then subsided on to the floor with a sniff
and an angry exclamation of:

"Read, you, whilst I sleep. And see to it that you do not make
off with the book, for it belongs to the church, and is very
valuable. Yes. I know you hard-ups! Why do you go roaming about
as you do--what is it you hope to gain by your tramping? . . .
However, tramp as much as you like. Yes, be off, and tell people
that a deacon has come by misfortune, and is in need of some good
person to take pity upon his plight. . . . Diomid Kubasov my name
is--that of a man lost beyond recall."

With which he fell asleep. Opening the book at random, I read the
words:

"A land unapportioned that shall produce a nourisher of
humanity, a being that shall put forth the bounty of his hand to
feed every creature."

"A nourisher of humanity." Before my eyes that "nourisher" lay
outspread, a nourisher overlaid with dry and fragrant herbage.
And as I gazed, in the haze of a vision, upon that nourisher's
dark and enigmatical face, I saw also the thousands of men who
have seamed this earth with furrows, to the end that dead things
should become things of life. And in particular, there uprose
before me a picture strange indeed. In that picture I saw
marching over the steppe, where the expanse lay bare and void--yes,
marching in circles that increasingly embraced a widening area--a
gigantic, thousand-handed being in whose train the dead steppe
gathered unto itself vitality, and became swathed in juicy,
waving verdure, and studded with towns and villages. And ever, as
the being receded further and further into the distance, could I
see him sowing with tireless hands that which had in it life, and
was part of himself, and human as, with thoughts intent upon the
benefiting of humanity, he summoned all men to put forth the
mysterious force that is in them, and thus to conquer death, and
eternally and invincibly to convert, dead things into things of
life, while traversing in company the road of death towards that
which has no knowledge of death, and ensuring that, in swallowing
up mankind, the jaws of death should not close upon death's
victims.

And this caused my heart to beat with emotions the pulsing wings
of which at once gladdened me, and cooled my fervour... And how
greatly, at that moment, did I feel the need of someone able to
respond to my questions without passion, yet with truth, and in
the language of simplicity! For beside me there lay but a man
dead and a man drunken, while without the threshold there was
stationed one who had far outlived her span of years. No matter,
however. If not today, then tomorrow, should I find a fellow-
creature with whom my soul might commune.

Mentally I left the hut, and passed on to the steppe, that I
might contemplate thence the little dwelling in which alone,
though lost amid the earth's immensity, the windows were not
blind and black as in its fellow huts, but showed, burning over
the head of a dead human being, the fire which humanity had
conquered for humanity's benefit.

And that heart which had ceased to beat in the dead man--had
everything conceived in life by that heart found due expression
in a world poverty, stricken of heart-conceived ideas? I knew that
the man just passed away had been but a plain and insignificant
mortal, yet as I reflected upon even the little that he had done,
his labour loomed before me as greater than prowess of larger
magnitude. Yes, to my mind there recurred the immature, battered
ears of corn lying in the ruts of the steppe track, the swallows
traversing the blue sky above the golden, brocaded grain, the
kite hovering in the void over the landscape's vast periphery.. .
. .

And along with these thoughts, there struck upon my ears a
whistling of pinions as the shadow of a bird flitted across the
brilliant, dew-bespangled green of the forecourt, and five cocks
crowed in succession, and a flock of geese announced the fact of
their awakening, and a cow lowed, and the gate of the cattle-pen
creaked.

And with that I fell to thinking how I should like really to go
out on to the steppe, and there to fall asleep under a warm, dry
bank.

As for the deacon, he was still slumbering at my feet--slumbering
with his breast, the breast of a prize-fighter, turned uppermost,
and his fine, golden shock of hair falling like a nimbus around
his head, and hot, fat, flushed red features and gaping mouth and
ceaselessly twitching moustache. In passing, I had noticed that
his hands were long, and that they were set upon shovel-shaped
wrists.

Next I found myself imagining the scene as the powerful figure of
this man embraced a woman. Probably her face would become lost to
sight in his beard, until nothing of her features remained
visible. Then, when the beard began to tickle her, she would
throw back her head, and laugh. And the children that such a man
might have begotten!

All this only made it the more painful and disagreeable to me to
reflect that the breast of a human being of such a type should be
bearing a burden of sorrow. Surely naught but joy should have
been present therein!

Meanwhile, the old woman's gentle face was still peering at me
through the doorway, and presently the first beam of sunlight
came glancing through the window-space. Above the rivulet's silky
glimmer, a transparent mist lay steaming, while trees and herbage
alike were passing through that curiously inert stage when at any
moment (so one fancied) they might give themselves a shake, and
burst into song, and in keys intelligible to the soul alone, set
forth the wondrous mystery of their existence.

"What a good man he is!" the old woman whispered plaintively as
she gazed at the deacon's gigantic frame. Whereafter, as though
reading aloud from a book invisible to my sight, she proceeded
quietly and simply to relate the story of his wife.

"You see," she went on "his lady committed a certain sin with a
certain man; and folk remarked this, and, after setting the
husband on to the couple, derided him--yes, him, our Demid!--for
the reason that he persisted in forgiving the woman her fault. At
length the jeers made her take to her room and him to liquor,
and for two years past he has been drinking, and soon is going to
be deprived of his office. One who scarcely drank at all, my poor
husband, used to say: 'Ah, Demid, yield not to these folk, but
live your own life, and let theirs be theirs, and yours, yours.'"

With the words, tears welled from the old woman's dim, small eyes,
and became merged with the folds and wrinkles on her grief-
stained cheeks. And in the presence of that little head, a head
shaking like a dead leaf in the autumn time, and of those kindly
features so worn with age and sorrow, my eyes
fell, and I felt smitten with shame to find that, on searching my
soul for at least a word of consolation to offer to the poor
fellow-mortal before me, I could discover none that seemed
suitable.

But at length there recurred to my mind some strange words which
I had encountered in I know not what antique volume --words which
ran:

"Let not the servants of the Gods lament but, rather, rejoice,
in that weeping and lamentation grieve both the Gods and
mankind."

Thereafter, I muttered confusedly:

"It is time that I was going."

"What?" was her hasty exclamation, an exclamation uttered as
though the words had affrighted her. Whereafter, with quivering
lips, she began hesitantly and uncertainly to fumble in her
bodice.

"No, I have no need of money," I interposed. "Only, if you
should be so willing, give me a piece of bread."

"You have no need of money? " she re-echoed dubiously.

"No, none. For that matter, of what use could it be to me?"

"Well, well!" she said after a thoughtful pause. "Then be it
as you wish, and--and I thank you."

*********************************

The sun, as he rose and ascended towards the blue of the
firmament, was spreading over the earth a braggart, peacock-like
tail of beams. And as he did so, I winked at him, for by
experience I knew that some two hours later his smiles would be
scorching me with fire. Yet for the time being he and I had no
fault to find with one another. Wherefore, I set myself to search
for a bank whence I might sing to him, as to the Lord of Life:

0h Thou of intangible substance,
Reveal now that substance to me!
Enwrap me within the great vestment
Of light which encompasseth Thee!
That with Thy uprising, my substance
May Come all-prevailing to be!

**

"Let us live our lives unto ourselves. Let theirs be theirs, and
ours, ours."





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Through Russia, by Maxim Gorky

